welcome , everyone to this lecture on multiple linear regression . in the preceding lectures , we sawhow to regress a single independent variable to a dependent variable . particularly , we weredeveloping a linear model between the independent and dependent variable . we also saw variousmeasures by which we can assess the model that we built . in this lecture , we will extend all of theseideas to multiple linear regression which consists of one dependent variable , but severalindependent variables . so , as i said that we have a dependent variable which we denote by y andseveral independent variables which we denote by the symbols xj , where j equals to p. there are pindependent variables which we believe affect their dependent variable . we will try to develop alinear model between the dependent variable y and these independent p independent variables xj jequals to p. in general , we can write this linear model as before . we can say ...where , , . , represents the slope parameters or the effect of the individual independent variableson the dependent variable . in addition we also have an error . this error is due to error in thedependent variable , measurement of the dependent variable . in ordinary least squares we alwaysassume that the independent variable measurements are perfectly measured and do not have anyerror whereas , the dependent variable may contain some error and that error is indicated as we donot know what this quantity is . we have assumed that it is a random quantity with zero mean andsome variance . if we take the i th sample corresponding to this measurement of x to xp and ycorresponding y we can say that i th sample dependent variable as , , ... , and so onfor i equals to n. we assume we have small n number of samples that we have obtained and ouraim is to find the values best estimates of , , , . , using these n sample measurements of x s andcorresponding y. this is what we call multiple linear regression because we are fitting a linear modeland there are many independent variables and we therefore , call the multiple linear regressionproblem . again in order to find the best estimates of the parameters , we actually set up theminimization of the sum squared of errors . in order to set it up in a compact manner using vectorsand matrices we define the following notations . let us define the vector y where which consists of allthe n measurements of the dependent variable y to yn . we have also done one further things wehave subtracted the mean value of all these measurements from each of the observations . so , thefirst one represents the first sample value of the dependent variable y the mean value of y over allthe measurements . so , the first sample is mean shifted value of the first observation the secondcoefficient or second value in this vector is the second sample value the mean value of thedependent variable and so on for all the n observations we have . so , these are the mean shiftedvalues of all the n samples for the dependent variable . similarly , we will construct a matrix x wherethe first column corresponds to variable independent variable again , what we do is take thesample value of the first independent variable and subtract the mean value of the first independentvariable . that means , we take the mean of all these n samples for the first variable and subtract itfrom each of the observations of the first independent variable . so , the first coefficient here wouldbe x , represents the sample value of the first independent variable first sample first independentvariable the mean value of the first independent variable , and we do this for all n measurements ofthe first independent variable . similarly , we do this for the second independent variable and arrangeit in the second column . so , this one represents the observation the first observation of the secondindependent variable the mean value of the second independent variable and we do this for all pvariables independent variables . so , this particular matrix x that we get will be a n x p matrix n isthe number of rows , p is the number of columns . you can view the first row as actually the samplefirst sample of all independent variables for the first sample of course , we have been shifted thatvalue and the second row is the second sample and so on and each column represents a variable . so ,first column represents the first independent variable and the last column represents the p thindependent variable . so , similarly we will represent all the coefficients , except , in a vectorform as a column vector . here basically as i am sorry a row vector . so , is the first coefficient , pis the coefficient corresponding the pth variable . so , we have vector which is a p x vector . we canalso define the the noise vector as corresponding to all the n observations . now , having definedthis rotation we can write our linear model in the form y equals x times . notice that we have notincluded , we have eliminated that indirectly by doing this mean subtraction . i will show you howthat happens , but you can take in that right now we have only interested in the slope parameters .this linear model only involves the slope parameters to p does not involve the parameterbecause that has been effectively removed from the linear model using this mean subtraction idea .so , we can write our linear model compactly as and we also make the user assumptions aboutthe error that it is a zero mean vector in this case because it is a multivariate vector , is a vector . so ,expected value of implies is a random vector with mean and the variance covariance matrix ofis assumed to be . sigma squared identity in this form it means all the s , to n have all have thesame variance sigma squared homoscedastic assumption . and we also assume that and areuncorrelated or i and j are uncorrelated , if i is not equal to j. in which case we can write thecovariance matrix of as . now , under this assumption we can go ahead and say we want to findthe estimates of so as to minimize the sum square of the errors . so , transpose is a compact wayof saying the sum of all errors error squared of all the errors in all the n measurements . so ,expanding this is nothing , but sum of i , i equals to n that is compactly written like this and this iswhat we want to minimize , but itself can be written as . so , we can write this whole thing as a. we want to minimize this which is a function of by finding the best value of . so , if weset up this optimization problem to minimize the sum squared errors to find , we will we can showwe can by differentiating that objective function with respect to and setting it equal to we getwhat are called the first order conditions and these first order conditions will result in the followingset of linear equations . we will get . now , this is a p cross remember x is a n cross p matrix . so ,x transpose is p cross n. so , this is a square matrix x transpose x is a square matrix of size p cross pand multiplied by the p cross vector and similarly it is p cross on the right hand side . so , these arep equations in p variables . their linear equations in x is all known , y is known . so , right hand side islike the , if you , what is that interpreted as ax .. it is a set of linear equations p equations in pvariables which can be easily solved if a is invertible . so , we assume that .is a full rank matrixinvertible , the meaning of this will become a little clearer later and if it is not invertible we will haveto do other things which we will again talk in another lecture . but , for the time being let us assumethat which is a square matrix is invertible , it is a full rank matrix and then you can easily find thesolution for solve this linear set of equations by taking which is exactly . so , the coefficientvector can be found by this thing and this is the solution that minimizes the sum squared errors , thisobjective function that we have written . so , once we get the slope parameters , can beestimated as the . notice thatthis is very similar to what we have in the univariatecase , where it says estimate is . so , it is very similar to that , you can see . nothing , but youcan also compare the solution for the slope parameters with the univariate case which says xydivided by xx . notice that y represents xy and represents xx in the univariate case you aredividing x y by xx , in the multivariate case division is represented by inverse . so , you get x transposex inverse times x transpose y. so , you can see it is very very similar to the solution for the univariatecase except that these are matrices and vectors and therefore , you have to be careful . you can notsimply divide , it is matrix times inverse times a vector that is a solution for which is slopeparameters . you can also estimate and by doing what is called augmentation of the x vectorwith a constant value in the final thing , but i did not use that approach . because , the mainsubtraction approach is a much better approach for estimating whether if for estimating andslope parameters because this is applicable even to another case called the totally squares . theaugmentation approach is valid only for ordinary least squares you can not use it for total leastsquares which we will see again later . so , that is why i use the means subtraction route in order toobtain the estimates of the slope parameter first followed by the estimation of using the estimateof the slope parameters in this value . now , you can also derive properties of these parameters , wecan show that the expected value of hat is which just means it is an unbiased estimate just as inthe univariate case and we can also get the variance of this hat . in this case it is a covariance matrixbecause it is a vector and we can show that the covariance matrix is sigma squared times this xtranspose x inverse . now , again you can go back and look at the univariate case , there the varianceof the slope parameter will be by sxx . in this case it is . so , represents xx . is thevariance of the error corrupting the dependent variables . we may have a priori knowledgesometimes in most cases we may not be able to know this value of sigma square we may not begiven this so , we have to estimate the sigma squared from data and we will show how to get this .these two parameters that actually we can show the first parameter says that the estimates ofthe slope parameters are unbiased . so , are unbiased estimator is an unbiased estimator of the truevalue . moreover it can show that among all linear estimators because hat is a linear function of y .notice that is nothing but a matrix which basically multiplies the measurements y so , can beinterpreted as a linear combination of the measurements . therefore , it is known as a linearestimator . among all such linear estimators we can show that has the least variance . therefore , it iscalled a blue estimator or unbiased estimator with the best linear unbiased estimator that is what itblue represents best in the sense of having the least variance . now , we can also estimate as i saidsigma squared from the data and that sigma square estimate is nothing , but the after you fit thelinear model you can take the predicted value for the ith sample from the linear model and computethis residual which is the measured value the predicted value for the ith sample , square it , takethe sum over all possible samples n samples divided by n p . again , if you go back to your linearcase or univariate case you will find that the denominator is n . here you have n p becauseyou are fitting p parameters p is slope parameters offset parameter . therefore , out of the nmeasurements p are taken away for the deriving the estimates only the remaining things are thedegrees of freedom or the variability in the residuals is caused by the remaining n pmeasurements and that is why you are dividing by n p whereas , in the univariate case youwould have divided by n because you are estimating only two parameters there . so , you can seea one to one similarity between the univariate regression problem and the multiple linear regressionproblem in every derivation that we have given here . now , once you have estimated , the varianceof the error used from the data you can go back and construct confidence intervals for each slopeparameter . we can show that the true slope parameter lies in this confidence interval for anyconfidence interval you might choose represents like a level of significance . so , if you sayis equal to . . would represents . . so , that will be a percent confidence interval , ok .correspondingly , i will find the critical value from the t distribution n with n p degrees offreedom and this represents by the lower value probability value from the t distribution and thisupper critical value where the probability area under the curve beyond the value is by . so , n p represents degrees of freedom . notice that in the univariate case it would have been n , veryvery similar . so , the confidence interval for j for any given can be computed using this particularformula and the term here s.e represents the standard deviation of the estimate of .and , that is given by the diagonal element diagonal element here of this quantity with sigma squarereplaced by the estimate here . so , we have computed the standard deviation of the parameterestimated parameter by using the estimated value of sigma multiplied by the diagonal element of .so , we are fitting the diagonal elements of the covariance matrix of parameters , ok , that is all wehave done . so , this represents the diagonal element or the square root of the diagonal elementwhich represents the standard deviation of the estimated value of which is what is used in order toconstruct this confidence interval . so , every one of this can be computed from the data as you cansee and you can construct . now , in the confidence level can later be used for testing whether theestimated parameter is significant or insignificant as we will see later . now , we will can alsocompute the correlation between y and which tells you whether the predicted value from the linearmodel is resembles or closely related to the measured value . so , typically we will draw a linebetween the y the measured value and the predicted value and see whether it is these things fall onthe degree line and if it does then we think that the fit is good . another way of doing this is tofind the correlation coefficient between y and y hat which is simply using the standard thing yimultiplied by summed over all quantities divided by the standard deviation of in y and thestandard deviation in y hat , that is for normalization . we could also use the coefficient ofdetermination r squared just as we did for the univariate case we can compute r squared assum squared error sum square total which is nothing , but . so , if we take this wewill actually we can show whether using the independent variables have we been able to get abetter fit ? if we have obtained a very good fit , then the numerator will be close to and r squaredwill be close to one . on the other hand , if we had not improved the fit because of x s any of the x sthen the numerator will be almost equal to the denominator and therefore , this one will be close to. so , a value of r square close to as before represents indication of a good linear fit whereas , avalue close to indicates the fit is not good . we can also compute the adjusted r square to accountfor the degrees of freedom notice that the numerator has n p degrees of freedom whereas , thedenominator as n degrees of freedom . therefore , we can do an adjusted r squared which dividesthe sse by the appropriate degrees of freedom . we can say this is the error due to per degree offreedom that is there in the fit whereas , the denominator represents the error because we havefitted only the offset parameter there are n degrees of freedom , this is the error per degree offreedom . so , this kind of a thing is a much also a good indicator instead of using r squared we canuse adjusted value of r square . so , these are all very very similar again to the univariate linearregression problem . so , we can use what we can check r squared and see whether the value isclose to and if it is we can say maybe the linear model is good to fit the data , but that is not aconfirmatory test . we have to do the residual plot as we did in linear regression univariately in linearregression . and , that is what we are going to do further . so , we are going to find whether the fittedmodel is adequate or it can be reduced further what this reduced further means we will explain . inthe univariate case there is only one independent variable , but here there are several independentvariables . maybe not all independent variables have an effect on y some of the independentvariables may be irrelevant . so , one way of trying to find whether a particular independent variablehas an effect is to test the corresponding coefficient . notice we have already defined the confidenceinterval for each coefficient and we can see whether the confidence interval contains in which casewe can say the corresponding independent variable does not have a significant effect on thedependent variable and we can perhaps drop it , ok. or we can also do what we call the test f testjust as we did in the univariate regression problem we can test whether the full model is better thanthe reduced model . the reduced model contains no independent variables whereas , the full modelcan contain all or some of the independent variables you can do many kinds of tests and we will dothis . so , we can test whether the reduced model which contains only the constant interceptparameter is a good fit as opposed to including all the independent variable some or all theindependent variables that is what we call the full model . we will consider a specific case herewhere we do the f test statistic for the case when we have a reduced model and compare it with thefull model . the reduced model we will consider with k parameters . specifically , let us consider thereduced model with only one parameter which means that we have only the constant interceptparameter we would not include any of the independent variables and compare it with the fullmodel which contains all of the independent variables including the intercept . so , the reducedmodel is one which contains only the offset parameter and no independent variables , the full modelis the case where we consider all the independent variables and the intercept parameter . so , thenumber of parameters we are estimating in the reduced model is only one . so , k equals and the fullmodel is the case where we have all the independent variables p independent variables . so , we areestimating p parameters in the full model , ok. so , what we do is perform a fit and compute thesum squared errors which is nothing , but the difference between y , the measured value and thepredicted value . so , we will first take the model containing only the offset or the intercept parameterand estimate . in this case of course , y bar will be the best estimate and we will compute sum squarederrors which is nothing , but the variance of the measurements for the dependent variable . then , wewould also perform a linear regression containing all the parameters independent variables . and , inthis case if we compute the difference between y and y predicted and take the sum squared errorsthat is the sse of the full model . so , when we want to compare whether we want to accept the fullmodel as compared to the reeves model what we do is take the difference in the sum squarederrors . remember , the sum squared errors for the reduced model will be greater than the sumsquared errors for the full model because the full model contains more number of parameters andtherefore , you will get a better fit . so , the difference in the fit , which is difference in the sumsquared errors between the reduced model fit and the full model fit that is the numerator divided bywhat we call the degrees of freedom . notice , the full model has p parameters . p independentvariable the offset and the reduced model in this particular case contains only one parameter . so , kequals . so , the degrees of freedom will be p. so , you divide this difference in the sum squarederrors by p. denominator is the sum squared errors of the full model which contains n p degreesof freedom because p parameters have been fitted . therefore , the degrees of freedom is to totalnumber of measurements p . and , so , we divide that sum squared errors for the denominator bythe number of degrees of freedom and then take this ratio as defined and that is your f statistic .now , in order to reject if we want to reject the null hypothesis or if you want to test the nullhypothesis against its alternative , we find the test criteria for the level of significance . we wouldtake it from the f distribution where the numerator degrees of freedom is p k for this particularcase it is exactly p. and the denominator degrees of freedom is n p and level of significance weuse and we compute the test criteria critical value from the f distribution . then , we compare thetest statistic with the critical value and if the test statistic exceeds the critical value at this level ofsignificance then we reject the null hypothesis that is we will say the full model is a better choice andthe independent variables do make a difference . and , this is a standard thing that r function willprovide . this particular comparison between the reduced model which has no independent variablesand the full model which contains all the independent variables in multi linear regression . of course ,you can choose different reduced models and compare with the full model . for example , you cantake the reduced model by leaving out only one of the independent variables so , that we will have pparameters . we can compare it with the full model and again perform a test to decide whether theinclusion of that independent variable makes a difference or not . so , this kind of combination can bedone depending on what stage you are and that will be you using in what we call the sequentialmethod for subset selection that will be discussed in a later lecture . but , essentially the r functionsonly provide a comparison between the reduced model which contains no independent variable andthe full model which contains all of the independent variables . let us go through a simple example inorder to what are called revisit these ideas . so , in this case we have what is called the a price datawhere customers have been asked to rate the food than the other aesthetics of a particularrestaurant . and , we also and the cost of the particular dinner also a data were obtained for theserestaurants and the location of these restaurants whether on they are on the east side of a particularstreet in new york or the west side . typically , in new york west side is probably a little poorerwhereas , the east side probably is a little richer neighbourhood . so , location of the restaurant alsowould indicate would have an effect on the price . so , these are the four independent variablespeople data was obtained on the quality of the food , the decor and service all this was rated by thecustomers and at the location of this restaurant and the price of dinner in that served in thatrestaurant was also taken . so , you would expect that the quality of the food the service level all ofthis would have a very direct influence on the price in the restaurant . and , a linear model was builtbetween y and the independent variables x to x . so , before we build a model we do a scatterplot as usual any visualization and here you because there are several independent variables we havenot just one plot scatter plot between y and x . for example , in this case remember price is y , yversus x this particular plot shows the correlation or the scatter plot for y versus x or y versusfood , price versus food . the second one is the scatter plot price and decor the third one is the scatterplot between price and service and the last one is price versus location , ok. and , similarly you canactually develop a scatter plot between food and decor which is here or food and service and so on .even though we consider all these variables that we have obtained like food decor service location asindependent , it is possible when we select these variables they are not truly independent . theremight be inter dependencies between the what we call the so called independent variables , that cangive rise to problem in a regression which we will see later that what we call the effect of co linearity .but , a scatter plot may reveal some interdependencies between the independent so calledindependent variables . so , for example , if we look at the scatter plot between food and decor it isseems to be completely randomly distributed this does not seem to be any quite correlation .however , food and service seems to be very strongly correlated . there seems to be a linearrelationship between food and service . so , perhaps you do not need to include both these variables .we will see later that is this true , but in this just a scatter plot itself reveals some interesting features .and , so , we will now go ahead and say perhaps a linear model between price and food thendecorous is seems to be pointed out or indicated by the scatter plots let us go ahead and build one .and , if we apply the r function lm to this data set and we examine the output , we will get this outputfrom r and tells that the intercept term is . and the slope parameters the coefficientmultiplying food is . , the coefficient multiplying decor is . and so on so forth . it also gives youthe standard error for each coefficient as well as the offset parameter which is nothing , but thesigma value for the estimated quantities and it also gives you the probability values p values as wecall them . and , notice if the p value is very low , it means that this coefficient is significant . we can nottake it that this value is , ok. any low value of this indicates that the corresponding coefficient issignificantly different from . so , in this case the first three has very low p values and therefore , thesignificant , but service has a high p value . therefore , it seems to indicate that this coefficient isinsignificant is equal almost equal to that is what this indicates . if you look at the east which is thisindependent location parameter that has does not have a very low p value , but it is still not bad .and therefore , it is significant only is insignificant only if you take a level of significance of . orsomething like that . if you take . or . and so on you will still consider this east this coefficientto be significant and that is what this is basically pointing out , this star indicates that . so , now wewill go ahead and try to actually look at the f value also , the f statistic says that the full model ascompared to the reduced model of using only the intercept is actually significant which means , theconstant model is not good and including these variables results in a better fit or explanation of theprice and therefore , you should actually include this . whether you should include all of them areonly some of them we can do different kinds of tests to find out what we have done in this particularcase is only compare the model without any of these independent variables which is called theconstant model with all of these variables included . that is the only two model comparisons we aremade the reduced model is one containing only the interceptor and the full model is one whichcontains intercept and all four independent variables and that is the p value it has given thecorresponding f statistic . so , we are saying that including these independent variables is importantin explaining the price , ok. so , but it may turn out that all of them is not necessary and that we willwe will examine further . so , the corresponding fit that we obtain is this . as i said that from the , whatyou call the as the confidence interval for the slope parameter for service we can say that we canremove this it is insignificant and perhaps we can remove this and try the fit . for the time being letus actually remove this and try the fit . we have done that . we have only included now food , decorin east and done the regression again and it turns out that the regression thing is still what you callthe r squared value is improved , not improved significantly , but not reduced . and , f value issignificant and we get the more or less the same coefficients for the other parameters also theintercept term and the slope parameters . it indicates that x is not adding any value to theprediction of y. the reason for this as we said if you look at the scatter plot service and food are verystrongly correlated . therefore , only either food or service needs to be included in order to explainprice and not both right . and , in this case service is being removed , but you can try removing food asthe variable and try to fit between price , decor and decor service and east and you will find that theregression is as good as retaining food and eliminating service . r squared value and the f statisticsseems to indicate that we can go ahead with the linear model , but we should further examine thestandardized residual plot for concluding whether the linear model is or not . there should be nopattern in the residuals . so , let us actually do the residual plot . here we have taken the standardizedresiduals and plotted it against what is called the predicted price value or the fitted value .remember , this is y i hat y i hat is only one variable so , you need to generate only one plot and wehave also shown here the in red lines the confidence interval for the standardized residuals andanything above this outside of this interval indicates out layers . so , for example , , sample number, sample number and and so on so forth may be possible outliers . and , but there is nopattern in the standardized residuals it spread randomly within this boundary and therefore , we cansay since there is no pattern a linear fit is acceptable . so , here the quality of the fit is shown here .so , the actual price , the measured value versus the y i hat predicted value is shown and a linearmodel seems to explain the data reasonably well . the last thing is , we have these out layers if youwant to improve the fit you may want to remove let us say the out layer which is farthest away fromthe boundary . for example , you may want to remove and redo the linear regression multimultiple linear regression and again repeat it until there are no out layers that will improve the rsquared value and the fit quality of the fit a little more , ok. so , we have not done that we leave thisas an exercise for you . so , what we have done is we have seen that whatever was valid for theunivariate regression can be extended to the multiple linear regression except that scalars there willget replaced by vectors and matrices corresponding . what was the variance there will become avariance covariance matrix here , what was a vector the scalar there might mean scalar mightbecome a mean vector here . so , you will see a one to one correspondence , but the residuals plotand interpretation of confidence interval for all of this the f statistic are more or less similar , exceptthat understand in the multiple linear regression there are several independent variables . all of themmay not be relevant . we may be able to take only a subset and i will actually handle subset selectionas a separate lecture . for the time being we are just an a significance test on the coefficient in orderto identify the irrelevant independent variables , but there are better approaches and we will takethat up in the following lectures . we will start with a decision tree . so , decision tree as the namesuggest is a tree like structure that you generate from data to do some machine learning tasks . and ,as we have seen before , the most common machine learning tasks are either classification orregression or function approximation . so , you can generate these decision trees for both these typesof problems , both classification problems and regression problems . just to recap for people whohave not seen this many times . a classification problem is one , where when you are given a data youare trying to classify it to one of the predefined classes that you have . and , regression problem is onewhere given a data you are trying to predict an output or target feature value . now , you could build adecision tree for either a classification problem our regression problem . and there are multiplealgorithms for building these trees , which are all mentioned here . but , what i would like to mentionis at the end of it what you are going to get is like a tree structure which is going to let you eitherpredict a value for a target or provide a classification . the reason why i mentioned many algorithmsis that when you use a particular software or a package these would become options that you canchoose . and there are multiple metrics that are used in building this decision tree and i willdemonstrate how one metric works in this lecture and you can see that the other metrics will worksimilarly . so , once you understand one of these you will be able to read on your own and understandthe other metrics and how they might be used . so , these metrics basically , we will talk about them inmore detail as we go along . these metrics basically allow you to unravel the tree so , to speak . so , ifyou think about a decision tree as a tree , with some top node and then there are multiple nodes thatare being unraveled and formed there are must be some logical procedure for this unraveling andmaking this tree from data . and , there could be multiple matrix and gini impurity informationentropy or variance reduction or metrics that are used . typically gini impurity and informationentropy are used when you have classification problems . and variance reduction is a metric that isused , when you have regression problems that you are trying to model . so , in this lecture i will focuson classification problems and gini impurity isometric . but what you need to see through this lectureis how this tree is formed ? and once you understand that it will be very easy to see how you candevelop a tree like that , for regression problems . so , the way i am going to teach this developmentof a decision tree or understanding decision trees is through an example . so , this will make it a lotmore concrete in terms of your understanding in terms of what the key ideas are in these decisiontrees ok. so , let us start with a classification problem as i mentioned in previous slide , i am going tofocus on a classification problem . so , let us assume that we have this problem this is a very very wellknown problem . if you just search for this you will see this being described in multiple papers it usedto be a data set that many people tried the algorithms on for has been for a while . now so , the ideais there is this iris flower and there are multiple species of this , given a new iris flower would you beable to classify it as one of the three species that we are considering here . so , the flower type is irisand the species are setosa , versicolor or virginica species . so now , when we say that given as a flowerwould you be able to classify it into one of these categories , we should have some training data to dothis . so , let us assume in this case for me to explain decision trees to you . let us assume that thereare above data points and that means , i have samples of this flower which are pre classifiedas being setosa , versicolor or virginica species . now when we say data what does that mean ? so , foreach sample what we might do is we might compute certain characteristics of that sample . in thisdata set there are four features there are computed for each sample . so , one is called the sepallength , the other one is sepal width petal length and petal width . so , these are actual geometricfeatures that that you compute for the sample . and then let us say you have this already icharacterized setosa you take each sample measure this and then put it into data and then say this isfrom setosa and so on . now , the problem is i have to come up with a classifier , which will learn howto classify the data when i when i have a new data point . based on already pre classified data that isused to train my algorithm and the algorithm that we are going to look at in this case is a decisiontree because which is what we are going to use in the example that we are going to look at . now , theranges for these feature values are several length if its a setosa flower , we notice that it is between. and . . if its versicolor . and virginica . and . . this is basic inspection of data and thenseeing what are the ranges of these values for each of these attributes for each of these classes . so ,this is one class this is another class another class and the attributes are distributed in these rangesfor this data . so , this is basic explanation of the problem that we are trying to solve . now , you willnotice as i described decision tree starting with this problem we will see that just from this data , weare going to generate a tree which is going to allow us to classify new data points . so , the key thingsthat i want you to notice as we go through this example or how this tree is generated at the end of it .if a new data point is given how would , that tree help us classify into one of these three classes is theimportant thing that i would like you to notice . let me explain decision trees through this example ofthis iris classification . so , decision tree as a name suggests is tree like structure where you havenodes which open out into other nodes which might open into other nodes and so on . and , you startwith one node and then you come to let us say certain number of nodes at the end . and , how doyou generate this tree and how it is useful for classification is what we are going to see in this lecture .so , to understand this easily let us think about , what each node means ? so , what each node means isthat each node has a collection of data points . so , if i start with the root node or the very first node ,this node is going to have all the data points that are there in the problem . so , in this case we knowthat there are data points from versicolor data points from virginica and data points ofsetosa . now if we did not build this tree at all and we just sat with this data and then i am going tosay let me do a classification whenever you give me a new data point then the best way to do thiswould be to look at this data . and then see which class is the most occurring class in this data pointunder the assumption that the global data set will also has similar proportions . so , whatever isoccurring the most here is the most likely species type in terms of the total data set . then we will sayit has to be either versicolor or virginica . and if you are forced to give one decision you mightrandomly break the tie and then say a new data point is either versicolor or virginica right . so , if youwere to just sit at the root node and then do this is the solution that you will come up with . but thisis not useful from a classification viewpoint what we are trying to do is , we are trying to use thefeatures of these samples . and , then do some computations so that we get a good classification witha high accuracy is what we are looking at right . because , if i just kept saying versicolor as the classwithout doing any more development of this decision tree . then in the sample points i will getof them right because every time i am just going to say versicolor . so , i will get right , buttimes i will get it wrong . so , that is very poor accuracy which is what you do not want . so , basicallythe idea is to somehow develop this tree . so , that whichever node i stopped and give an answer theaccuracy improves . so , that is basic idea of this decision tree . the same notion also works withregression trees , if you had one target value at the first node if i if you ask you what is likely to bethe target value for a new data point . if you do not want to do anything at all you might simply takethe average of all the training data points and say that is a likely value for any new data point right ,but that will give you a very poor model . so , in that case also you will try to develop this tree expandthis tree so that your regression problem you can solve much better . so , the same idea works forboth classification and regression problem is what i wanted to tell you . now we are going to learnhow we are going to develop this tree starting with just this data node the first node . and these areconcepts that we are going to introduce for us to explain to you how this tree is developed ? butbefore we do that to understand this better , let us look at what might be the best case scenario forthis example . if i were to develop a tree supposing i were to develop this tree at the end of it let ussay i get three nodes . and , this node has data of all versicolor and virginica is this is and this nodehas all data corresponding to versicolor virginica setosa and this has data corresponding tothis , , . if this is the case then what happens is , as you start from here and go through thesenodes we will explain what going through this nodes mean . as you start from the base node and usethe features of the new data that has been given the feature values and you traverse this tree . and ifyou end up here , then you will say the new data belongs to versicolor sample . if you end up here youwill say it belongs to virginica and if you end up here you will say it belongs to setosa . now , thequestion is how do you develop the tree ? so , that this partition happens and what does traversingthis tree mean . so , how do i start from here and decide whether i should go to this node or this nodeis basically what i am going to teach and that is the basic idea of decision tree as an algorithm itself .now , remember that you might not always be able to classify this data into such distinct nodes , theremight be some overlap which you might simply not be able to get rid of and all of this depends onthe data . so , in some data sets you can get a complete separation and in some data set whateveryou do you might not get complete separation . and actually you know from your machine learningknowledge that getting complete separation and training said by itself might not be very helpful ,because basically we are over learning the training set . so , the ability to generalize when i get a newdata point might be much less if this happens ok. now , that we have set up this basic tree structureand then explain to you the ideas of how we are going to use this tree to make the classification .now , it is easy for me to describe how this tree itself is generated purely from data and how thesealgorithms work to develop this tree . a tree that is developed like this from data is called a decisiontree and it is called a decision tree because at every node based on the feature value we make adecision traverse the tree till you stop at one point which you where you give the final decision interms of what class this data belongs to ok. so , it basically mimics how we take decisions if this is thisand that is that then do this and so on . the same notion is captured here in the tree ok. so , now todevelop this tree we are going to introduce some basic terminology as i mentioned before , i amgoing to describe this notion of gini impurity . so , if you notice here gini impurity for every node so ,you can you can define a gini impurity for every node in the tree . and , for every node in the tree giniimpurity is different using this equation . let us try and understand what this equation means . so , tounderstand that equation , let us take this node here and then we will come back to one of thesenodes and then kind of contrast what happens . so , if i take a gini index for this node , this formulabasically says gini index i fi . so , basically we have to define what f is . so , there are threeclasses , each f basically computes a fraction of samples from a particular class in the total set . so , forexample , if we compute a fraction for versicolor f the number of samples in this data set ofversicolor is , the total number of samples is . so , f will be by and f will also be by. and f will be by . so , once we have these three numbers we can compute a giniimpurity for this node as . so , that is how you compute the giniimpurity of this node ok. similarly , once we get to each of these nodes based on the number of datapoints of these classes in the total data we can compute gini impurity . and , you will notice and inthis example it will be nicely seen as we go through this . as we go to different nodes because yourpartitioning this data this gini impurity will keep changing for each one of these nodes . now , if youare defining gini impurity in a decision tree for each of these nodes we might also ask this questionas to what is a best node right in this decision tree ? so , if you go back and look at these nodes so , forexample , let us try and compute a gini impurity for this node . why am i picking this node this node iswhat i am going to call as pure node because if you look at this data point . if i come to this node i cancategorically say the sample belongs to versicolor right . if i somehow land up in this node , then i cansay the sample belongs to virginica . and if i land up here i will say the sample belongs to setosa right .so , these are what are called pure nodes that means , these nodes have some more collected data ,corresponding to only very specific classes where the other classes are excluded in the data . so , if ihave a node like this a pure node a how would i compute the gini index i use the same formula ? butwhat will that value be we can see this here . in this case again i have i fi . in this case now , ffor versicolor is divided by because . there are only samples this is equal to , fwill be by and f will be by ok. so , the fractions will be and once you use this andthen calculate the gini impurity index . so , the gini impurity will be ok. so , whenever the giniimpurity is that means , we have got pure sets were only one class is represented and the otherclasses are all left out . so , ideally then the goal of the whole decision tree is to start with the dataitself which gives me a gini impurity based on doing nothing with this data . and then somehowunravel this tree and get two nodes at the bottom , which are all pure are as close to pure as possibleright . so , here the top of this decision tree there will be a positive value for this gini impurity . andour goal is to come down to the lowest level of the tree where all the nodes have gini impurity ofor pure nodes . so , in other words what we are trying to do is we are trying to keep reducing this giniimpurity as we go down this tree to get to gini impurity so that is what we are trying to do . so ,now we come to this question of how do we decide how to traverse this tree ? so , then we ask thisquestion what does it mean when we say i want to traverse this tree . so , basically as i said beforeeach one of this is a decision . so , at this point i have to take a decision and the way i take a decisionhere is i pick one feature from the data set and then do some computation with that feature . and ,the result of this computation allows me to go either here or here . so , i have one example might betake one feature and if that feature is greater than go to this node and if the feature is less thango to this node might be one way to do this . so , in others other words whenever we are trying totraverse on unravel will this tree , what we are looking at is we are looking at a future value andmaking some decisions based on that future value . so , this whole tree itself is developed like thatand each one of these decision points will have a feature and something that you compare it with , sothat you can develop this decision tree . now , as you notice even in this case there are four featuresright petal width , petal length , sepal width and sepal length . so , you could choose any one of thesefour features for opening out this tree . and each of these features have different ranges of values aswe saw in the previous slide . so , there has to be some partition point for those values so , that wemake a decision to go to one or the other part of the tree . so , how do we do that ok , that is what weare going to see . so , once we have this gini impurity , we are also going to discuss something calledgini split index . so , let us assume i choose some feature and then decide to split this data ok. now ,what does it mean , when i say one feature and somehow i am going to make this decision to split thedata we will see in the next slide ? but for now bear with me i am just think about this supposing i sayi am going to pick one feature in this case you know sepal length and then i am going to say if sepallength is less than some value a go here and if it is greater than equal to some value a , go here rightthat is something that i can make a decision . so , why should i only choose sepal length not sepalwidth why petal length petal width ? and so on are questions that we are going to answer , but just toexplain this whole process here i am explaining this ok. then if this is how i am going to unravel thistree , then what i do is of all the samples here i find the samples that would satisfy this condition andthen put them here ok maybe of the samples we will see the actual values i am just explainingthis . so , maybe of this samples you know if of these samples are such that sepal length is lessthan a then the remaining will go here . so , this way you split the whole sample of datapoints into some number . now it might be just that this has maybe data points come herecome here it all depends on how what we choose here . maybe of these data points come hereand the remaining go there and so on ok. so , now , you have this because we have already definedthe gini impurity for each node based on this we can actually compute a gini impurity for this node .and based on what comes here we can compute a gini impurity for this node . so , now if we use thissepal length and this number a as the choices to make this split then we can compute somethingcalled gini split index which is basically the difference between the gini index of this original nodeminus p and p will come back to we can compute a gini index for this node same formula basedon how this split happened . and we can compute a gini index for this node based on how split thissplit happened . the only thing that we need to understand at this formula is what are p and pthat is very simple . if i start with data points , let us say data points come here and datapoints go here . p is the fraction of data points that came to this node which will be by . andp will be the fraction of data points that went to this node which will be by . so , we cancompute this fraction and we can also compute the gini index for the each of these once we havethat we can compute this gini split index ok. now what this value is will depend very critically onwhat feature we chose here to unravel this . and also what is the value of the feature that we choseto make that partition . now , the whole notion of decision tree is how do you come up with thesequence of features so , that you unravel the tree and the values that you use to partition this all ofthose are automated . and these algorithms these packages will give you the best solution for thesesplits and so on . you do not have to do it , but i am explaining this , so that you understand whatbasically happens when you finally , see a result for a decision tree example that you might work with .so , basically the important rules for constructing this is so , every parent node which will have ahigher gini impurity remember i said at the at the top is where i have not done any splitting . andideally what i am looking for is the bottom level nodes which are pure so that means , for then thegini impurity is there they are pure sets . so , basically gini impurity keeps coming down as i godown the tree . and there are multiple options for doing this splitting . so , what we do is , wheneverthere are multiple options we could enumerate all of those options or we could use some smartalgorithm to pick options that are likely to be very good . and let us say i have multiple options , i willcompute the gini split index for each of these options and then i will always choose the gini splitindex which is maximum right . now , why do we want to choose a gini split index which is maximumthat comes from your previous equation here . now , if i am having a node with a certain giniimpurity and i want to make children nodes of those what i want to do is , i want to get to these purenodes as quickly as possible right , only then i can do perfect classification . so , ideally if i could split insuch a way that the two children node that come out of this main node , have gini impurity of rightthat would be the best solution . in which case , the gini split index will be the gini impurity value ofthe original node because this will be this will be right , so that is the best solution . so , actuallythe split index should be as high as possible which basically means that these values are as low aspossible . so , this has low impurity or there as close to pure sets are possible . so , when i havemultiple possibilities one thing i can do is i can you numerate these possibilities and then for eachone of these possibilities i compute a gini split index . and , then i find out the possibility for whichthe gini split index is a maximum and then i say this is the choice i am going to make ok. so , that iswhat is seen here . so , let us look at this now with this example now that i have explained all of this ,you will understand this hopefully much better . so , the root node as we showed before in thisexample is with this number of data points ok. so , we do , , in this case for setosaversicolor and you know virginica . so , if you know look at this node here you see these numbersof data points ok and also you see this node has something . so , which says versicolor that basicallymeans if you are sitting in the node for a data point and i asked you what do you classify the sampler .so , you are going to say i am going to classify the samplers versicolor that means , at the beginning ifi do not do anything at all any new sample you are giving me i am just going to close my i sense andsay its over versicolor . and why am i saying its versicolor i could have said versicolor are virginicabecause there are data points i have just randomly broken this tie and then said its for versicolorok. so , this now you see in this node the none of the data is lost ok. so , all the data is still therehere right , setosa versicolor and virginica . now , remember in the tree thing i said the firstdecision we have to take . so , the decision means i have to choose one of the features there are fourdifferent possibilities . what the algorithms do is that , they look at all these multiple possibilities andfind the best split somehow to come up with the most compact tree that you can build . but here inthis lecture i am trying to explain the ideas behind it . so , i am going to take a couple of examples toshow you what happens . so , for example if the algorithm had actually chosen the petal length asbasically the feature of choice here . now , you look at petal length and then . so , you see this here . so ,if its setosa the petal length range is to . versicolor its . to and this is to . sorry . and thisrange is . to . . now , if you notice all of this are automatically done by the algorithm here i amjust trying to explain this with this data so that you understand there is this logic behind how i breakthis and so on . and , once you look at a tree you will be able to see what is actually happening here .now if you look at this range to . , . to . you will see that there is an overlap right . so , anydata value that i pick which partitions this , there is likely to be both versicolor and virginica and thepartition data . but if you look at this here there is a clean partition because for setosa , petal length isbetween and . . for versicolor is and . for virginica its . and . . so , if you take any valuebetween . and ok , you would be able to separate out setosa from the other species right . so , onevalue you can take is roughly in the middle of . and . so that you get good classification . so , youmight say if petal length is less than . go to this node and if petal length is greater than . go tothis node right . if that is the decision that you are making then let us see how the data will getpartitioned right . so , in the training data if you pick all the data points where petal length is less than. and bring it to this node , you will notice all the setosa data will come here to this node . and allthe versicolor and virginica data will go to this node ok. so , remember this data points now hasbeen split it into two nodes . one node has retained data points and the other node has retaineddata points . now you notice that this data point node is a pure node whereas , the datapoint node is not a pure node . nonetheless , if you make this decision that i am going to choosepetal length as the first feature based on which i am going to separate this and . as the numberthen you will get this . and , now you can quite easily compute the gini index for this which is sorrygini impurity for this which is which is what i had mentioned , thiswill turn out to be . . now since this is a pure node , you will get the value to be here because atthe three fractions or by , by and by so , you will get a value of here . and , if you lookat this here you will get a value of by , by and by as the three fractions . so , i willhave minus minus . square minus . square which is what is shown here its . . so , i have agini impurity for this i have gini impurity for this i have a gini impurity for this . now , for this optionof petal length and value of . , if i were to compute a gini split index remember gini split inductorsin indexes the gini impurity value of this minus whatever fraction of data came here times the giniimpurity of this minus whatever fraction of data came here times the gini impurity of this . we havealready computed the gini impurity of these three nodes here . so , the gini split index is the originalnodes gini impurity minus points came here . so , by and the gini impurity is timesminus points came here . so , by times the gini impurity of this which is . . so , if wecompute this you get . ok. so , please look at this computation and if you understand thiscomputation every other time the same computation is done there is no difference at all . so , all youneed to know is that every node has a gini impurity and then based on this partition you cancompute a gini split index . so , if i were to do this and said instead of petal length let me use sepallength ok and then i decide sepal length is what i use . and then let us say i come up with this valueof . , if you asked me how did you come up with this . there are multiple heuristic in these things .and , you can use a very simple heuristic here to come up with . . now , the reason why i do notwant to go too much into this heuristic is there are multiple possibilities and these algorithmsautomatically figure out what are good possibility . so , we really do not need to worry about how this. comes about , but you want to vary think about how once i have a final solution how i understandthat solution . so , let us say somehow i have come up with this . as the as the best split value here .so , basically i say sepal length is . remember this is again the top node , which is whatever we hadbefore without any partition . now , what i do is i partition data such that all the data which havesepal length less than . , i bring to this node and all the data which have sepal length greater than. i bring to this node . and it might turn out when i do this that samples of setosa comes hereand from the next one and from the next one . and notice what i do here ok , i basically have thisnode saying setosa . and why does it say setosa ? because if you look at this data point the maximumnumber of class from which this data comes is setosa right . so , if i land up here after at the end of mydecision tree process then i will say that setosa that sample is most likely to be setosa right . and ifyou look at this here this is virginica that is because of setosa of versicolor and of virginica .so , the maximum number of samples come from the virginica species . so , i will say the sample that ihave is a virginica sample . now , i do not want to go through these computations , if you do the samecomputations as i showed before you will get a split index value of . . and , you will notice theprevious value was different from this . the key things that i want to notice look at the mechanics ofthis very simple all that is happening is your original data set is being split into multiple data setsright . so , in the first case the original data set was split into two data set in a particular fashion andin the second choice the same data set is split into two data sets which have different from what igot for the first data set right . so , the way the decision tree works is actually splitting this data setinto multiple nodes . and in each node depending on whatever class is preponderant in the data i amgoing to classify that that is it right . so , if i have more nodes in the tree if i start from here now whatwill happen is this data set will be split more and this data set will be split more . so , you can think ofthis original data as being whittle down into smaller and smaller data sets in each of these nodes andthe way that smaller and smaller data sets are developed is through these choices that we make . so ,in this case we set sepal length less than . then we go to the training data set . and , say allinstances where sepal length was less than . i combine into this node and greater than . , icombine into the other node . now , after doing all of this possibilities we be might identify that petallength is the best possibility . so , which if you go back and notice here so , if i do petal length as thepossibility then i have already classified all setosa samples . so , i do not need to explore this portionof the tree anymore , simply because there is nothing to do it is already a pure set right the onlyproblem is here . so , what i want to do is i want to start exploring this part of the tree more and ifyou notice this that what we are doing it . so , we are starting with the node where i have thisversicolor with and . now , again i have multiple choices right , again i can say i want to dopetal length again there is nothing stopping you from that again i have this four choices and again ihave to compare them some with some value . so , let us say i did choose petal width and then sayless than . . now , what will happen is of the samples have already been classified . so , theyare not any more under consideration . so , i start with this other samples which is versicolorand virginica . and , then what i do is i use this petal width and then say less than . i collect all ofthis data from this and see how many come here . so , about of this comes here and aboutof the comes here . so , is right . now , notice what i call this node this node i call asversicolor because most of the samples in this node are from versicolor . and , this node i will call asvirginica because most of the samples from this node are from virginica . so , ultimately you do all ofthis and then basically you come up with this kind of decision tree . so , basically what it says is if i amhere i have this versicolor as the decision this is setosa , this is versicolor versicolor virginica . so , nowwhen i get a new data point , how will i use this decision tree ? the way i will use this decision tree is , iwill first take the data point and i will check what is the petal length in the data point right . if thatpetal length is . then i will say for this new data point it is actually setosa and the problem is doneright . now , if it is greater than . then what i will do is i will look at the petal width of this new datapoint . and , if it is less than . i will say its versicolor if its greater than . i will say its virginica right .knowing fully , well that i could have errors here and errors here . so , for example , you know timeswhen it is actually virginica this is being called versicolor even in the training data . so , in the testdata we do not know , that is where we will use a test data to check the decision tree and see howmany times do i get this to be the correct number right . so , that is what i will look at . now , there isalways you know the possibility of some misclassification at the end the data might not be complete ,so that you can clearly classify this problem all the time and you know you . if you are not happy withthis and then you are saying ok , in this node its not still pure and can i actually break this downfurther . so , that i get and you have to look at other features . and , see whether the otherfeatures will allow you to do this in some cases they might allow you to do it in some cases the datamight be such that you can not do it . and , as i mentioned before even in cases where the data allowsyou to do this you do not want to keep building a tree which is very very complex right . so , you donot want to have a very very deep tree , which completely learns this training data set which will haveno generalization capability . so , you might want to stop at some point and then say in the trainingset i am willing to take certain amount of errors so that i have better generalization capability with atest data . now , that we have seen decision trees random forest is a very very simple idea the keynotion of random forest is the following . so , when you look at decision trees if there are minorchanges in data or there are minor errors in data , the decision tree that comes about can be quitedifferent . so , decision trees are not generally very robust to errors in data right because you arechoosing some numbers and in some cases if there are errors these numbers might not partitionthem very well and so on . so , in some sense what you want is if you give the data set and then youbuild a decision tree . and , if the data change set changes a little bit you do not want to see majorchanges in the decision tree . you do not want decision trees to completely change which is possiblebecause of errors in data . so , to avoid that and somehow give it robustness we come up with thisidea of random for us and as the name suggests random forest it is a collection of decision treesright . so , you might ask the question how do i make multiple decision trees from the same data set .so , the way random forest work is a following .you have all this data , what you do isyou make multiple data sets from your original data . so , how do you make multiple data sets fromyour original data ? what you do is you sometimes sub select only a portion of the data right . andthen say i am going to build a decision tree for this portion of the data , in some cases you might subselect only a certain features in the data . so , in the previous case we saw four features you might sayi am going to drop one feature and then say that is my data set right . so , you can sub select numberof data points you can sub select number of features and so on . so , if i have one original data setfrom this i generate multiple data sets which are kind of marked form of the original data set , eitherthrough dropping some data or dropping some features and so on . now , using the technique that idiscussed for each of this data set you can come up with a decision tree right . so , if i makedifferent data sets from a original data then i can build decision trees . so , there those decisiontrees together form a random forest ok. now , you might ask the question has to i have nowdecision trees which solution from which decision tree do i use ?so , in random forestwhat you do is , if you have decision trees you go through all are those trees get a solution from allof them and whatever is the majority decision of all these trees that is a solution of the randomforest . so , for example , here you might get one subset of data where you only keep sepal length ,sepal width and petal length and then build a tree . and , let us say you have a new test data point andlet us say this three predicts setosa .now , you could have built another tree with only sepal lengthand petal length and that is another decision tree . and , when you give a new data point you onlypick the sepal length petal length attributes of that and run it through this tree and then say let ussay that is also saying it is setosa .. now , you could have petal length and petal widthand in these cases you could have dropped some data also right . so , you could sub select data alsoand then send this new test data point and if that also says setosa .now , there are three trees andall of them said setosa so , the solution is set also . now , if two of them had set setosa and one isvirginica the solution is still setosa . so , basically that is what is called majority . now , if one says setosaone says virginica and one says versicolor there is a problem , you have to break the tie somehow andthen give a solution . but , in general when you have multiple trees you would hope that there will besome consensus among all of these three solutions and you say that solution is the solution for therandom forest . so , by doing this the stochasticity or the problems with the data can be addressed toa large extent in many problems . by basically bagging the trees there are multiple trees from whichyou are getting the result . and , each of these trees themselves are produced from splitting the datato through dropping of some data points are dropping of some features and so on . so , basically youtry to make yourself immune to fluctuations in data by multiple data sets , that you generate andwhen all of them overwhelmingly say something is a result then it is likely to be correct than justdepending on one decision tree , so that is the idea of random forests . now , all of this is for you tounderstand how these things work , but when you use one of these python packages they will domost of this work for you . all you need to know is when you look at it and see tree in to understandwhat that tree means . and you have to know the difference between random forest and decisiontree and so on . so , hopefully this has been useful session for you , to understand decision trees andrandom for us . thank you .and in n dimensions this quantity is a scalar becauseyou have x element , n elements in x and n elements in and this becomes something like. . . n n. so , this is a scalar . and , then we saw that if this quantity is a very large negativenumber then the probability is and if this quantity is a very large positive number the probability isand , the transition of the probability at . . so , remember i said you have to always look at it fromone class s viewpoint . so , let us say if you want class to have high probability and class is a rowproblem low probability case , then you need to have a threshold that we described before that youcould convert this into a binary output by using a threshold . so , if you were to use a threshold of .because probabilities go from and , then you notice that this p x becomes . exactly whenx equals . this is because p x then equals e , which is equal to by . e also noticeanother interesting thing that this equation is then the equation of the hyper plane . so , if i had datalike this , and data like this and if i draw this line any point on this line is the probability equal to . , apoint . that basically says that any point on this line in this d case or hyperplane in the ndimensional case will have an equal probability of belonging to either class or class which makessense from what we are trying to do . so , this model is what is called a logit model .let us take a very simple example to understand this . so , let us assume that we are given data . so ,here we have data for class and data for class and then clearly this is a two dimensional problem .so , the hyperplane is going to be a line . so , a line will separate this . and , in a typical case in thesekinds of classification problems this is actually called as supervised classification problem . we callthis a supervised classification problem because all of this data is labeled . so , i already know that allof this data is coming from class and all of this data is coming from class . so , in other words i ambeing supervised in terms of what i should call as class and what i should call as class . so , inthese kinds of problems typically you have this and then you are given a new data which is called thetest data . and then the question is what class does this test data belong to . so , it is either class orclass as far as we are concerned in this example . just to keep in mind that there would be usedproblems like this . remember , at the beginning of this course i talked about fraud detection and soon , where you could have lots of records of fraudulent let us say credit card use and all of thoseinstances of fraudulent credit card use you could describe by certain attribute . so , for example , thetime of the day , whether the credit card was done at the place where the person lives , credit cardtransfer or a credit card use was done at the place the person lives and many other attributes . so , ifthose are the attributes let us say many attribute are there , and you have lots of records for normaluse of credit card and some records for fraudulent use of credit card , then you could build a classifierwhich given a new set of attributes that is a new transaction that is being initiated could identifywhat likelihood it is of this transaction being fraudulent . so , that is one other way of thinking aboutthe same problem . so , nonetheless as far as this example is concerned what we need to do is wehave to fill this column with s and s. if i fill a column with a row with then that means , this databelongs to class and if i fill it one then let us say this belongs to class and so on . so , this is whatwe are trying to do . we do not know what the classes are .so , just so , let me see thisit is a very simple problem . we have plotted the same data that was shown in the last table and youwould notice that if you wanted a classifier something like this would do . so , this problem islinearly separable , so it could you could come up with a line that does it . so , let us see what happensif we use logistic regression to solve this problem .so , if you did a logistic regressionsolution then in this case it turns out that the parameter values are these . and how did we get theseparameter values ? these parameters values are guard through the optimization formulation , whereone is maximizing log likelihood with , and as decision variables . and as we see here thereare decision variables because this was a two dimensional problem so , one coefficient for eachdimension and then one constant . now , once you have this then what you do is you have yourexpression for p x which is as written before the sigmoid . so , this is a sigmoidal function that wehave been talking about then whenever you get a test data let us say , , you plug this into thissigmoidal function and you get a probability . let us say the first data point when you plug in you geta probability this . so , if we use a threshold of . , then what we are going to say is anything less than. is going to belong to class , and anything greater than . is going to belong to class . so , youwill notice that this is , class , class , class , class , class , class , class , class , class , right .so , as i mentioned in the previous slide what we wanted was to fill this column and if you go acrossrow then it says that particular sample belongs to which class . so , now , what we have done is wehave classified these test cases which the classifier did not see while you were identifying theseparameters . so , the process of identifying these parameters is what is usually called in machinelearning algorithms as training . so , you are training the classifier to be able to solve test cases later .on the data that you use while these parameters are being identified are called the training data andthis is called the test data , that you are testing a classifier with . so , typically , what you do is if youhave lots of data with class labels already given . one of the good things you know that one should dois to split this into training data and the test data and the reason for splitting this into training andtest data is the following . in this case , if you look at it , we built a classifier based on some data andthen we tested it on some other data , but we have no way of knowing whether these results areright or wrong , right . so , we just have to take the results as it is . so , ideally what you would like to dois you would like to use some portion of the data to build a classifier and then you want to retainsome portion of the data for testing and the reason for retaining this is because the labels arealready known in this . so , if i just give this portion of the data to the classifier the classifier will comeup with some classification , now that can be compared with the already established labels for thosedata points , right . so , from verifying how good your classifier is , it is always a good idea to split thisinto training and testing data what proportion of data you use for training , what proportion of datause for testing , and so on are things to think about . also , there are many different ways of doing thisvalidation as one would call it with this data there are techniques such as k fold validation and so on .so , there are many ways of splitting the data into train and test and then verifying how good yourclassifier is . nonetheless , the most important idea to remember is that one should always look atdata and partition the data into training and testing , so that you get results that are consistent .so , if one were to draw these points again that that we use this in this exercise . so , these are all classdata points , these are class data points and this is your hyperplane that a logistic regressionmodel figured out and these are the test points that we tried with this classifier . so , you can see thatin this case everything seems to be working well , but as i said before you can look at results like thisin two dimensions quite easily . however , when there are multiple dimensions it is very difficult tovisualize where the data point lies and so on . nonetheless so , it gives you an idea of what logisticsregression doing . it is actually doing a linear classification here . however , based on the distance insome sense from this hyperplane we also assign a probability for the data being in a particular class .now , there is one more idea that we want to talk about in logistic regression . this idea is what iscalled as regularization . the idea here is the following . if you notice the objective function that weused in the general logistics regression which is what we call as a log likelihood objective function .here theta again speaks to the constants in the hyperplane are the decision variables and this is theform of the equation that we saw in the previous lecture and in the beginning of this lecture also ibelieve . now , if you have n variables in your problem or n features or n attributes then the numberof decision variables that you are identifying are n . so , one constant for each variable and theconstant if this n becomes very large then there are large number of variables that represent , butthen what happens is this logistic regression models can over fit because there are so manyparameters that you could tend to over fit the data . so , to proven this what we want to do issomehow we want to say though you have this n decision variables to use , one would want thesedecision variables to be used sparingly . so , whenever you use a coefficient for a variable for theclassification problem then we want ensure that you get the maximum value for using that variablein the classification problem . so , in other words , if let us say there are two variables i say, then for this classifier i am using both let us say variables x and x as being important . whatone would like to do is make sure that i use these only if they really contribute to the solution or tothe efficacy of the solution . so , one might say that for every term that you use you should getsomething in return or in other words if you use a term and get nothing in return i want to penalizethis term . so , i want to penalize these coefficients . this is what is typically called as regularization .so , regularization avoids building complex models or it helps in building non complex models so , thatyour fitting effects can be reduced . so , how do we penalize this ? so , notice that what we are tryingto do is we are trying to minimize a log likelihood . so , what we do here is we add another term to theobjective and lambda is called the regularization parameter and this h theta is some regularizationfunction . so , what we want to do is when i choose the values of theta to be very large , i want thisfunction to be large , so that the penalty is more or whenever i choose a variable , right away apenalty kicks in . and this penalty should be offset by the improvement i have in this term of theobjective function , so that is the basic idea behind regularization . now , this function could be ofmany types if you use this function to be theta transpose theta then this is called l typeregularization . so , in the previous example this will turn out to be theta would be ,transpose times . so , in this case h of theta will become . now , there areother types of regularization that you can use . you can use this is what is called the l type or lnorm . you can also use something called an l type or an l norm . and larger the value of thiscoefficient that is multiplying this and the more is regularization strength that is you are penalizingfor use of variables lot more . and , one general rule is regularization helps the model work betterwith test data because you avoid over fitting on the trained data , so that is in general something thatone can keep in mind , as one does these kinds of problems . so , with this the portion on logisticregression comes to an end . what we are going to do next is we are going to show you an examplecase study , where logistics regression is used for a solution . however , before we do this case studysince all the case studies on classification and clustering , will involve looking at the output from thearc code . i am going to take a typical output from the arc code and there are several results that willshow up , these are called performance measures of a classifier . i am going to describe what theseperformance measures are and how you should interpret these performance measures once you usea particular technique for any case study . so , in the next lecture we will talk about theseperformance measures . and then following that will be the lecture on a case study using logisticregression , right . so , thank you for listening to this lecture . and , i will see you in the next lecture .so , what is k means clustering ? so , k means clustering is a technique that you can use to cluster orpartition a certain number of observations , let us say n observations in to k clusters . the number ofclusters which is k is something that you either choose or you can run the algorithm for several caseand find what is an optimum number of clusters that this data should be partitioned into . just a littlebit of semantics i am teaching in clustering here under the heading of classification . in general typicalclassification algorithms that we see are usually super waste algorithms in the sense that the data ispartitioned into different classes and these labels are generally given . so , these are labeled datapoints and the classification algorithms job is to actually find decision boundaries between thesedifferent classes . so , those are supervised algorithms . so , an example of that would be the knearest neighbor that we saw before where we have label data and when you get a test data youkind of bin it into the most likely class that it belongs to . however , many of the clustering algorithmsare unsupervised algorithms in the sense that you have n observations as we mentioned here , butthey are not really labeled into different classes . so , you might think of clustering as slightly differentfrom classification , where you are actually just finding out if there are data points which share somecommon characteristics or attributes . however , as far as this course is concerned we would stillthink of this as some form of classification or categorization of data into groups just that we do notknow how many groups are there a priori . however , for a clustering technique to be useful once youpartition this data into different groups as a second step one would like to look at whether there arecertain characteristics that kind of pop out from each of this group to understand and label theseindividual groups in some way or the other . so , in that sense we would still think of this as someform of categorization which i could also call as classification into different groups without anysupervision . so , having said all of that k means is one of the simplest unsupervised algorithms ,where if you give the number of clusters or number of categories that exist in the data then thisalgorithm will partition these n observations into these categories . now , this algorithm works verywell for all distance matrix you again need a distance metric as we will see where we can clearlydefine a mean for the samples .so , when we were talking about optimization fordata science i told you that you know all kinds of algorithms that you come up with in machinelearning there will be some optimization basis for these algorithms . so , let us start by describingwhat a k means clustering optimizes or what is objective that is driving the k means clusteringalgorithm . so , as we described in the previous slide there are n observations x to xn and we areasking the algorithm to partition this into k clusters . so , what does it mean when we say we partitionit into k clusters ? so , we will generate k sets s to sk and we will say this data belongs to this set andthis data belongs to the other set and so on . so , to give a very simple example let us say you havethis observations x , x all the way up to xn and just for the sake of argument let us take that we aregoing to partition this data into clusters ok. so , there is going to be one set for one cluster , clusterand there is going to be another set for the other cluster , cluster . now , the job of k meansclustering algorithm would be to put these data points into these two bins ok. so , let us say thiscould go here this could go here x could go here xn could go here maybe an x could go here and soon . so , all you are doing is you are taking all of these data points and putting them into two bins andwhile you do it what you are looking for really in a clustering algorithm is to make sure that all thedata points that are in this bin have certain characteristics which are like in the sense that if i taketwo data points here and two data points here , these two data points will be more like and thesetwo data points will be more like each other , but if i take a data point here and here they will be insome sense unlike each other . so , if you cluster the data this way then it is something that we canuse where we could say look all of these data points share certain common characteristics and thenwe are going to make some judgments based on what those characteristics are . so , what we reallywould like to do is the following we would like to keep these as compact as possible so that like datapoints are grouped together which would translate to minimizing within cluster sum of squaredistances . so , i want this to be a compact group . so , a mathematical way of doing this would be thefollowing . so , if i have k sets into which i am putting all of this in , you take set by set and then makesure that if you calculate a mean for all of this data the difference between the data and the meansquared in a nonsense is as minimum as possible for each cluster and if you have k clusters you kindof sum all of them together and then say i want a minimum for this whole function . so , this is a basicidea of k means clustering . so , there are there is a double summation the first summation is for allthe data that has been identified to belong to a set , i will calculate the mean of that set and i will findout a solution for this these means in such a way that this within cluster distance x which is in the setminus i mean is minimized not only for one cluster , but for all clusters . so , this is how you define thisobjective . so , this is the objective function that is being optimized and as we have been mentionedmentioning before this i is mean of all the points in set si .now , let us look at howan algorithm such as k means works it is a very simple idea . so , let us again illustrate this with a verysimple example . let us say there are two dimensions that we are interested in x and y and there areeight observations . so , this is one data point , this is another data point . so , there are eight datapoints and if you simply plot this you would you would see this and when we talk about cluster . so ,notionally you would think that there is a very clear separation of this data into clusters right . now ,again as i mentioned before in one of the earlier lectures on data science very easy to see this in dimensions , but the minute we increase the number of dimensions and the minute we increase thecomplexity of the organization of the data which you will see at the end of this lecture itself you willyou will find that finding the number of clusters is really not that obvious . in any case let us say wewant to identify or partition this data into different clusters and let us assume for the sake ofillustration with this example that we are interested in partitioning this data into clusters . so , weare interested in partitioning this data into clusters . so , right at the beginning we have noinformation right . so , we do not know that this all belong to one cluster all of these data pointsbelong to another cluster , we are just saying that are going to be clusters that is it . so , how do wefind the clusters because we have no information labels for this and this is an unsupervisedalgorithm . what we do is we know ultimately there are going to be clusters . so , what we are goingto do is , we are going to start off cluster centers in some random location . so , that is the firstthing that we are going to do . so , you could start off clusters somewhere here and here or youcould actually pick some points in the data itself to start these clusters .so , forexample let us say we randomly choose two points as cluster centers . so , let us say one point that wehave chosen is , . so , which would be this point here and let us assume this is what is group andlet us assume that for group we choose . which is here . the way we have chosen this if we goback to the previous slide and look at this the two cluster centers have been picked from the dataitself . so , the one group was observation and the other group centre was observation . now , youcould do this or like i mentioned before you could pick a point which is not there in the data also andwe will see the impact of choosing this cluster centers later in this lecture . now , that we have twocluster centers then what this algorithm does is the following it finds for every data point in ourdatabase this algorithm first finds out the distance of that data point from each one of this clustercenters . so , in this table we have distance which is the distance from the point , and we havedistance which is the distance from the point , . now , if you notice since the first point from thedata itself , ie , the distance of , from , is . so , you see that distance is and distance is thedistance of the point , from , . similarly , since we chose , as representative of group if youlook at point which was a , point the distance of , from , is and this is the distance of ,from , which will be the same as this . for every other point since they are not either , or ,there will be distances you can calculate . so , for example , this is a distance of the second point from, and this is a distance of the second point from , and if you go back to the previous slide thesecond point is the second point is actually . , . and so on . so , you will go through here each ofthese points are different from , , you will generate these distances . so , for every point youwill generate two distance one from , other one from , . now , since we want all the points thatare like , to be in one group and all the points which are like , to be in the other group , we usea distance as a metric for likeness . so , if a point is closer to , then it is more like , than , andsimilarly if a point is close to , it is more like , than , . so , we are using a very very simple logichere . so , you compare these two distances and whichever is a smaller distance you assign that pointto that group . so , here distance is less than distance . so , this is assigned to group thisobservation which is basically the point , the second observation again if you look at it distanceis less than distance . so , the second observation is also assigned to group and you will noticethrough this process a third and fourth will be assigned to group and , , , will be assigned togroup because these distances are less than these distances . so , by starting at some random initialpoint we have been able to group these data points into two different groups one group which ischaracterized by all these data points the other group which is characterized by these data points .now , just as a quick note whether this is in dimensions or n dimensions it is really does not matterbecause the distance formula simply translates and you could have done that for two classes in ndimensions as easily . so , while visualizing data in n dimensions are hard this calculation whether it isor n dimension it is actually just the same . now , what you do is you know that these grouppositions are the centers of these groups were randomly chosen now , but we have now moreinformation to update the centers because i know all of these data points belong to group and allof these data points belong to group . so , a better representation for this group so , initially therepresentation for this group was , , a better representation for this group would be the mean ofall of these four samples and the initial representation for group was , , but a betterrepresentation for group would be the mean of all of these points . so , that is step .so , we compute the new mean and because group has points , , , , we do a mean of thosepoints and the x is . and y is . . similarly , for group we do the mean of the labels are thedata points , , , and you will see the mean here . so , notice how from , and , the mean hasbeen updated in this case because we chose a very simple example the updation is only slight . so ,these points move a little bit . now , you redo the same computation because i still have the sameeight observations but now , group is represented not by , but by . and . and group isrepresented by . and . and not , . so , for each of these points you can again calculate adistance and distance . and , notice previously this distance was because the representativepoint was , . now that the representative point has become , . and . this distance is nomore , but it is still a small number . so , for each of these data points with these new , new meansyou calculate these distances and again use the same logic to see whether distance is smaller ordistance is smaller and depending on that you assign these groups . now , if we notice that by doingthis there was no assignment reassignment that happened . so , whatever were the samples that wereoriginally in group remain in group and whatever are the samples which are in group remain ingroup . so , if you again compute a mean because the points have not changed the mean is notgoing to change . so , even after this the mean will be the same . so , if you keep repeating this processthere is no never going to be any reassignment . so , this clustering procedure stops . now , if it werethe case that because of this new mean let us say for example , if this had gone into group and letus say this and this had gone into group , then correspondingly you have to collect all the points ingroup and calculate a new mean collect all the points in group and calculate a new mean andthen do this process again .and , you keep doing this process till the mean change isnegligible or no reassignment . so , one of these two things happen , then you can stop the process .so , this is a very very simple technique . now , you notice this technique is very very easilyimplementable it does not matter the dimensionality of the data you could have variables ,variables the procedure remains the same . the only thing is we have to specify how many clustersthat are there in the data and also remember that this is a unsupervised learning and so , weoriginally do not know any labels . but , at the end of this process at least what we have done is wehave categorized this data into classes or groups . now , if you find something specific about this groupby further analysis then you could basically sometimes maybe even be able to label these groupsand the broad categories . if that is not possible at least you know from a distance viewpoint thatthese two might be different behavior from the system viewpoint . so , from an engineering viewpointwhy would something like this be important ? if i let us say give you data for several variablestemperatures , pressures , concentrations and so on flow for several variables , then you could run aclustering algorithm purely on this data and then say i find actually that there are two clusters of thisdata . then , a natural question and engineer might ask is if the process is stable i would expect all ofthe data points to be like , but since it seems like there are two distinct groups of data either both ornormal , but there is some reason why there is this two distinct group or maybe one is normal andone is not really normal , then you can actually go on probe of these two groups which is normalwhich is not normal and so on . so , in that sense an algorithm like this allows you to work with justraw data without any annotation what i mean by annotation here is without any more informationin terms of labeling of the data and then start making some judgments about how the data might beorganized . and , you can look at this multi dimensional data and then look at what is the optimumnumber of clusters maybe there are five groups in this multi dimensional data which would beimpossible to find out by just looking at an excel sheet . but , once you do an algorithm like this thenit maybe organizes this into or or groups then that allows you to go and probe more into whatthese groups might mean in terms of process operations and so on . so , it is an important algorithmin that sense . now , we kept talking about finding the number of clusters , till now i said you let thealgorithm know how many clusters you want to look for , but there is something called an elbowmethod where you look at the results of the clustering for different number of clusters and use agraph to find out what is an optimum number of clusters . so , this is called an elbow method . and ,you will see a demonstration of this in an example . the case study that follows this lecture you willsee how this plot looks and how you can make judgments about the optimal number of clusters thatyou should use . so , basically this approach uses what is called a percentage of variance explained asa function of number of clusters . but those are very typical looking plots and you can look at thoseand then be able to figure out what is the optimal number of clusters .so , i explainedhow in an unsupervised fashion you can actually start making sense out of data and this is a veryimportant idea for engineers because this kind of allows a first level categorization of data just purelybased on data and then once that is done then one could bring in their domain knowledge tounderstand these classes and then see whether there are some judgments that one could make .couple of disadvantages of k means that i would like to mention the algorithm can be quitesensitive to the initial guess that you use . it is very easy to see why this might be . so , let me showyou a very simple example . so , let us say i have data like this . so , if my if i start my cluster pointsinitial cluster points here and here you can very clearly see by the algorithm all these data points willbe closer to this . so , all of this will be assigned to this group and all of these data points are closer tothis . so , they will be assigned to this group , then you will calculate a mean and once a mean iscalculated there will never be any reassignment possible afterwards then you have clearly these twoclusters very well separated . however , if just to make this point supposing i start these two clustercenters for example , one here and one somewhere here then what is going to happen is that whenyou calculate the distance between this cluster and all of these data points and this cluster center .and , all of these data points it is going to happen that all these data points are going to be closer tothis and all of these data points are going to be closer to this than this point . so , after the firstround of the clustering calculations you will see that the center might not even move right becausethe mean of this and this might be somewhere in the center . so , this will never move , but thealgorithm will say all of these data points belong to this center and this center will never have anydata points for it . so , this is a very trivial case , but it just still makes the point that if you use the samealgorithm depending on how you start your cluster centers you can get different results . so , youwould like to avoid situations like this and these are actually easy situations avoid , but when youhave multi dimensional data and lots of data and which you can not visualize like i showed you here itturns out it is not really that obvious to see how you should initialize . so , there are ways of solvingthis problem , but that is something to keep in mind . so , every time you run an algorithm if the initialguesses are different you are likely to get at least minor differences in your results . and , the otherimportant thing to notice look at how i have been plotting this data , i typically i have been plotting tothis data , so that you know the clusters are in general spherical . but , let us say if i have data like thiswhere you know all of this belongs to one class and all of this belongs to another class , now k meansclustering can have difficulty with this kind of data simply because if you look at data within this classthis point and this point are quite far though they are within the same class whereas , this point andthis point might be closer than this point in this point . so , if in an unsupervised fashion if you ask kmeans clustering to work on this depending on where you start and so on , you might get differentresults . so , for example , if you start with three clusters you might in some instances find threeclusters like this . so , though underneath the data is actually organized differently and if these happento be two different classes in reality , in an unsupervised fashion when you run the k means clusteringalgorithm you might say all of this belongs to one class all of this belongs to another class and all ofthis belongs to another class and so on . so , these kinds of issues could be there . of course , as i saidbefore there are other clustering algorithms which will quite easily handle data that is organized likethis , but if you were thinking about k means then these are some of the things to think about . so ,with this we come to the conclusion of the theory part of this course on data science for engineers ,there will be one more lecture which will demonstrate the use of k means on a case study . withthat all the material that we intended to cover would have been covered um . i hope this was anuseful course for you we tried to pick these data science techniques , so that you get a good flavor ofthe things that you think about and also actually techniques that you can use for some problemsright away . but , more importantly our hope has been that this has increased your interest in thisfield of data science and as you can see that there are several fascinating aspects to think aboutwhen one thinks about machine learning algorithms and so on . and , this course would havehopefully given you a good feel for the kind of thinking and aptitude that you might need to followup on data science and also the mathematical foundations that are going to be quite important asyou try to learn more advanced and complicated machine learning techniques either on your own orthrough courses such as this that are available . thank you very much and i hope a large number ofyou plan to take the exams and get a certification out of this course . thanks again .in thislecture , we will look at a very very simple yet powerful classification algorithm called the k nearestneighbors . so , let me introduce a k nearest neighbor classification algorithm .it iswhat is called a non parametric algorithm for classification . so , let me explain what this nonparametric means . remember , when we looked at logistics regression for example , we said let us saythere is data like this and we are going to use the train data to develop a hyper plane of this formin the d case and any time a new data point comes what we do is we use theparameters that have been estimated from the train data to make predictions about test data . so ,remember we had this e power this term divided by plus e power this term right here . so , thisfunction is actually a function of . so , these are all parameters that i have already beenderived out of this data and any time a new test data comes in , it is sent through this function andthen you make a prediction . so , this is a parametric method because parameters have been derivedfrom the data . k nearest neighbor is a different idea where i do not get parameters like this out ofthe data . i am going to use the data itself to make classification . so , that is an interesting differentidea that one uses in k nearest neighbors . i just want to make sure that we get the terminologyright . we will later see that the k nearest neighbor there is one parameter that we use for classifyingwhich is the number of neighbors that i am going to look at . so , i do not want you to wonder sincewe are using anyway a parameter in the k nearest neighbor why am i calling it non parametric . so ,the distinction here is subtle , but i want you to remember this the number of neighbors that we usein the k nearest neighbor algorithm that you will see later is actually a tuning parameter for thealgorithm that is not a parameter that i have derived from the data . whereas , in logistic regressionthese are parameters i can derive only from the data . i can not say what these values will be a prioriwhereas , i could say i will use a k nearest neighbor with neighbors , neighbors and so on . so , thatis a tuning parameter . so , i want you to remember the distinction between a tuning parameter andparameters that are derived from the data and the fact that k nearest neighbor is a non parametricmethod speaks to the fact that we are not deriving any parameters from the data itself however , weare free to use tuning parameters for k nearest neighbors . so , that is an important thing toremember . it is also called a lazy learning algorithm where all the computation is deferred untilclassification . so , what we mean by this is the following if i give train data for example , for logisticregression i have to do this work to get these parameters before i can do any classification for a testdata point right . so , without these parameters i can never classify test data points . however , in knearest neighbor you just give me data and a test data point i will classify . so , we will see how that isdone , but no work needs to be done before i am able to classify a test data point . so , that is anotherimportant difference between k nearest neighbor and logistic regression for example . it is alsocalled as an instant based learning where the function is approximated locally . so , we will come backto this notion of local as i describe this algorithm .now , we might ask when do weuse this as i started this lecture i mentioned it simplest of classification algorithms , very easy toimplement and you will see when i explain the algorithm how simple it is . there is no explicittraining phase and so on and there is no generalization for the training data and all that . it just that igive the data and then i just wait till they give me a new data point to say what class it should belongto . of course , based on the algorithm itself i can also predict for the train data points itself what classthey should belong to and then maybe compare it with the label that the data point has and so on .nonetheless , i am not going to explicitly get some parameters out . and , when does one use thisalgorithm ? this is a simple algorithm when there are complicated non linear decision boundaries thisalgorithm actually works surprisingly well and when you have large amount of data and the trainphase can be bogged down by large number of data in terms of an optimization algorithm and so onthen you can use this . however , a caveat is you will see as we describe this algorithm when you havemore and more data the classification of nearest neighbor itself will become complicated . so , thereare ways to address this but when we say when the amount of data is log all that we are saying issince there is no explicit training phase . there is no optimization with a large number of data pointsto be able to identify parameters that are useless at later in classification . so , in other words in otheralgorithms you will do all the effort a priori and once you have the parameters then it classificationbecomes on the test data point becomes easier . however , since k and then is a lazy algorithm all thecalculations are deferred till you actually have to do something at that point there might be a lotmore classic lot more calculations if the data is large .so , the input features for knearest neighbors could both quantitative and qualitative and output are typically categorical valueswhich are what type of class does this data belong . now , it is not necessary that we use k nearestneighbor only for classification though that is where it is used the most you could also use it withvery very simple extensions or simple definitions for function approximation problems also and youwill see as i describe this algorithm how it could be adapted for function approximation problemsquite easily . nonetheless , as far as this lecture is concerned we are going to say the outputs orcategorical values which basically says different classes and what class does this data point belong to .in one word if you were to explain k nearest neighbor algorithm you would simply say k nearestneighbor explains a categorical value using the majority vote of nearest neighbors . so , what basicallywe are saying is if there is a particular data point and i want to find out which class this data pointbelongs to all i need to do is look at all the neighboring data points , and then find which class theybelong to and then take a majority vote and that is what is the class that is assigned to this datapoint . so , it is something like if you want to know a person you know his neighbors something likethat is what is used in k nearest neighbors .now , remember at the beginning of thisportion of data science algorithms i talked about the assumptions that are made by differentalgorithms . here for example , because this is a non parametric algorithm we really do not make anyassumptions about the underlying data distribution , we are just going to look at the nearestneighbors and then come up with an answer . so , we are not going to assume probability distributionor any other a separable ad assumptions and so on . as i mentioned before this k the number ofneighbors we are going to look at is a tuning parameter and this is something that you select right .so , you use a tuning parameter , run your algorithm and you get good results then keep thatparameter if not you kind of play around with it and then find the best k for your data . the key thingis that because we keep talking about neighbors and from a data science viewpoint whenever we talkabout neighbors we have to talk about a distance between a data point and its neighbor . we reallyneed a distance metric for this algorithm to work and this distance metric would basically say howwhat is the proximity between any two data points . the distance metric could be euclidean distance ,mahalanobis distance , hamming distance and so on . so , there are several distance metrics that youcould use to basically use k nearest neighbor .so , in terms of the algorithm itself it isperformed using the following four steps . nothing is done till the algorithm gets a data point to beclassified . once you get a data point to be classified let us say i have n data points in my databaseand each has a class label . so , for example , x belongs to class , x belongs to class , x belongsto class and so on x n belongs to let us say class . so , this is you know a binary situation , binaryclassification problem . this need not be a binary classification problem . for example , x couldbelong to class and so on . so , there may be many classes . so , multi class problems are also veryvery easy to solve using knn algorithm . so , let us anyway stick to binary problem . then what you aregoing to do is let us say i have a new test point which i call it x new and i want to find out how iclassify this . so , the very first which is what we talk about here is we find a distance between thisnew test point and each of the label data points in the data set . so , for example , there could be adistance d between xnew and x , d between xnew and x , d and so on and dn . so , once youcalculate this distance then what you do is you have n distances and this is the reason why we saidyou need a distance metric right in last slide for a knn to work . once we have this distance thenwhat we do is basically we look at all of these distances , and then say i order that the distances fromthe smallest to the largest . so , let us say if dn is the smallest distance so , dn may be d , d , dwhatever it is . so , i order them this is the smallest to the largest you can also think of this as closestto the farthest right because the distances are all from xnew . so , the distance is then the point isxnew itself . so , any small distance is the closest to xnew and as you go down it is farther and farther .now , the next step is very simple if let us say you are looking at k nearest neighbors with k equal to, then what you are going to do is you are going to find the first three distances in this and thisdistance is from xn , this distance is from x and this distance is from x . so , once we order thisaccording to distance and go from the smallest to largest once we started in this fashion then we alsoknow what the corresponding data points are . so , this belongs this is the data point xn . so , this is thedistance between xn and xnew , distance between x and this . so , now , i have these three datapoints that i picked out from the data set . now , if i want to classify this all that i do is the following . ifind out what class these data points belong to . so , if all of them belong to class then i say xnew isclass if all of them belong to class i say xnew is class if two of them belong to class one andthe third one belongs to class i do a majority vote and still say it is class . if two of them belong toclass and one belongs to class , i say it is class , that is it that is all the algorithm is . so , it says tofind the class label that the majority of this k label data points have and i assign it to the test datapoint , very simple right . now , i also said this algorithm with minor modifications can be used forfunction approximation . so , for example , if you so choose to you could take this and then let us say ifyou want to predict what an output will be for a new point , you could find the output value for thesethree points and take an average for example , very trivial and then say that is the outputcorresponding to this . so , that becomes adaptation of this for function approximation problems andso on . nonetheless for classification this is the basic idea . now , if you said k is equal to then whatyou do is you go down to numbers and then do the majority voting . so , that is all we do .so , let us look at this very simple idea here let us say this is actually the training data itself and then iwant to look at k equal to and then see what labels will be for the training data itself and the blueare actually labeled . so , this is supervised right . so , the blue are all belonging to class and the red isall belonging to class and then let us say for example , i want to figure out this point here blue point .though i know the label is blue what class would k nearest neighbor algorithm say this point belongsto ? say , if i want to take k equal to then basically i have to find three nearest points which arethese three . so , this is what is represented and since the majority is blue this will be blue . so ,basically if you think about it this point would be classified correctly and so on . now , even in thetraining set for example , if you take this red point i know the label is red however , if i were to run knearest neighbor with three data points when you find the three closest point they all belong toblue . so , this would be misclassified as blue even in the training data set . so , you will notice onegeneral principle is there is a possibility of data points getting misclassified only in kind of this regionwhere there is a mix of both of these data points . however , as you go farther away the chance ofmiss classification it keeps coming down . so , again in some sense you see a parallel saying if i wereto draw a line here and then say this is all red class this is all blue class then points around this line iswhere the problem is right as they go farther away the problems are less . nonetheless , notice howwe have never defined a boundary line or a curve here at all right . the data points themselves tellyou how this boundary is not . so , in that sense it is while it is simple it is also in some sensesophisticated because we never have to guess a boundary , the data points themselves define aboundary in some sense . so , i can actually effectively use this algorithm for complicated non linearboundaries which you would have to guess a priori if we were using a parametric approach . so , thatis the key idea here . a similar illustration for k equal to , now if i want to let us say a check this datapoint from the training set itself then i look at it is five neighbors closest , all of them are red .so , this is classified as red and so on . so , this is the basic idea .now , you do not haveto do anything till you get a data point . so , you could verify how well the algorithm will do on thetraining set itself . however , if you give me a new test data here so , which is what is shown by thisdata point then if you want to do a classification there is no label for this . remember , the other redand blue data points already have a label from prior knowledge this does not have a label . so , i wantto find out a label for it . so , if i were to use k equal to , then for this data point i will find the threeclosest neighbors , they happen to be these three data points . then i will notice that two out of theseare red . so , this point will get a label class . if on the other hand the test data point is here and youwere using k equal to , then you will look at the five closest neighbor to this point and then you seethat two of them are class and three are class . so , majority voting this will be put into class . so ,you will get a label of class for this data point . so , this is the basic idea of k nearest neighbor . so ,very very simple .however , these are some of these the things to consider beforeapplying knn . so , one has to choose the number of neighbors that one is going to use the value of kwhether whatever that is and the results can quite significantly depend on the parameter thatyou choose particularly when you have noise in the data and that has to be taken into account . theother thing to keep in mind when using knn is that when you do a distance between two data pointsx and x let us say and , let us say there are n components in these . the distance metric will takeall of these components into picture . so , since we are comparing distance then that basically meansevery attribute for this data in this data point we are comparing distances . the problem with this isthat if for example , there are a whole lot of attributes which actually are not at all important from aclassification viewpoint , then what happens is though they are not important from a classificationviewpoint they contribute in the distance measure . so , there is there is a possibility of this featuresactually kind of spoiling the results in k nearest neighbor . so , it is important to pick features whichare which are of relevance in some sense . so , the distance metric actually uses only features whichwill give it the discriminating capacity . so , that is one thing to keep in mind . the other the problem isthese are these are handle able , these are rather easily handled , but these are things to keep in mindwhen you look at these kinds of algorithms and also particularly this being the first course on datascience i am assuming for most of you these are kinds of things that you might not have thoughtabout before . so , it is worthwhile to kind of think about this do some mental experiments to see whythese kinds of things might be important and so on . now , the other aspect is scaling . so , forexample , if there are two attributes , let us say in data temperature and concentration andtemperatures are in values of concentrations are in values of . , . and so on when you take adistance measure and these numbers will dominate over this . so , it is always a good idea to scaleyour data in some format before doing this distance , otherwise while this might be an importantvariable from a classification viewpoint it will never show up because these numbers are bigger andthey will simply dominate the small number . so , feature selection and scaling are things to keep inmind . and , the last thing is curse of dimensionality . so , i told you that while this is a very nicealgorithm to apply because there is not much computation that is done at the beginning itself .however , if you notice if i get a test data point and i have to find let us say the five closest neighborsthere is no way in which i can do this it looks like , unless i calculate all the distances . so , that canbecome a serious problem if the number of data points in my database is very large . let us say ihave data points and let us assume that i have an algorithm k nearest neighbor algorithmwith k equal to . so , really what i am looking for is finding closest data points from this data baseto this data point . however , it looks like i have to calculate all the distances and then sortthem and then pick the top . so , in other words to get this top i have to do . so , much work right .so , there must be smarter ways of doing it but nonetheless one has to remember that the numberof data points and number of features one has to think how to apply this algorithm carefully .so , the best choice of k depends on the data and one general rule of thumb is if you use large valuesfor k then clearly you can see you are taking lot more neighbors . so , you are getting lot moreinformation . so , the effect of noise on classification can become less . however , if you take largenumber of neighbors , then your decision boundaries are likely to become less crisp and more diffuseright . so , because if let us say there are two classes like this then for this data point if you take a largenumber of neighbors then you might pick many neighbors from the other class also . so , that canmake the boundaries less crisp and more diffuse . on the fifth slide flipside if you use smaller valuesof k then your algorithm is likely to be affected by noise and outliers . however , your decisionboundaries as a rule of thumb are likely to become crisper . so , this is these are some things to keepin mind .and , as i mentioned before it is important to remove relevant features andscaling is also an important idea . so , if you choose your features carefully then you would get betterclassification with knn . so , with this we come to an end of this lecture on k nearest neighbors andfollowing this lecture there will be a case study which will use k nearest neighbor that will be taughtby one of the teaching assistants and after that i will teach a lecture on k means clustering . thankyou and i look forward to seeing you again in a future lecture . thanks .in thislecture i will describe a technique called logistic regression . logistic regression is a classificationtechnique which basically develops linear boundary regions based on certain probabilityinterpretations . while in general we develop linear decision boundaries this technique can also beextended to develop non linear boundaries using what is called polynomial logistic regression . forproblems where we are going to develop linear boundaries the solution still results in a non linearoptimization problem for parameter estimation as we will see in this lecture . so , the goal of thistechnique is given a new data point i would like to predict the class from which this data point couldhave originated . so , in that sense this is a classification technique that is used in a wide variety ofproblems and it is surprisingly effective for a large class of problems .just to recapthings that we have seen before we have talked about binary classification problem before just tomake sure that we recall some of the things that we have talked about before . we said classificationis the task of identifying what category a new data point or an observation belongs to . there couldbe many categories to which the data could belong , but when the number of categories is it is whatwe call as the binary classification problem . we can also think of binary classification problems assimple yes or no problems where you either say something belongs to a particular category or no itdoes not belong to that category .now , whenever we talk about classificationproblems we have described this before we say it data is represented by many attributes x to x n .we can also call this as input features as shown in the slide and these input features could bequantitative or qualitative . now , quantitative features can be used as they are . however , if we aregoing to use a quantitative technique , but we want to use input features which are qualitative , thenwe should have some way of converting this qualitative features into quantitative values . one simpleexample is if i have a binary input like a yes or no for a feature . so , what do we mean by this ? so , icould have yes let us say a . , . and then another data point could be no . and so on . so ,you notice that these are quantitative numbers while these are qualitative features . now , you couldconvert this all into quantitative features by a coding yes as i and no as . so , then those also becomenumber . there is a very crude way of doing this there might be much better ways of codingqualitative features into quantitative features and so on . you also have to remember that there aresome data analytics approach that can directly handle these qualitative features without a need toconvert them into numbers and so on . so , you should keep in mind that that is also possible .now , that we have these features we go back to our pictorial understanding of these things just forthe sake of illustration , let us take this example where we have this dimensional data . so , here wewould say x is x , x variables let us say x is here x is here . so , its organized into data like this nowlet us assume that all the circular data belong to category and all the stored data belong to anothercategory . notice that circle data would have certain x and certain x and similarly started i wouldhave certain x and certain x . so , in other words all values of x and x such that the data is herebelongs to class and such that the data is here belongs to another class . now , if we were able tocome up with hyper plane such as the one that is shown here we learn from our linear algebramodule that to one side of this hyper plane is a half space this side is half space and depending onthe way the normal is defined you would have a positive value and a negative value to each side ofthe hyper plane . so , this is something that we are dealt with in detail in of the linear algebraclasses . so , if you were to do this classification problem then what you could say is if i get a datapoint somewhere here i could say it belongs to whatever this class is here . so , let us call this forexample , we could call this class we could call this class and we would say whenever a data pointfalls to this side of a line then it is class and if a data point falls to this side of the line we will say itsclass and so on . however , notice that any data point , so whether it falls here it falls here we aregoing to say class , but intuitively you know that if this is really a true separation of these classes ,then this is for sure going to belong to class . but as i go closer and closer to this line there is thisuncertainty about whether it belongs to this class or this class because data is inherently noisy . so , icould have a data point which is true value here however , because of noise it could slip to the otherside and so on . so , as i come closer and closer to this then you know the probability or theconfidence with which i can say it belongs to a particular class can intuitively come down . so , simplysaying yes this data point and this data point belongs to class is answer , but that is pretty crude .so , the question that this logistics regression and services can we do something better usingprobabilities . so , i would like to say that the probability that this belongs to class is much higherthan this because its far away from the decision boundary . so , how do we do this ? is a question thatlogistics regression addresses .so , as i mentioned before the probability ofsomething being from a class if we can answer that question that is better than just saying yes or noanswers right . so , one could say yes this belongs to a class a better nuanced answer could be that yesit belongs to a class , but with a certain probability as the probability is higher , then you feel moreconfident about assigning that class to the data . on the other hand if we model throughprobabilities we do not want to lose binary answer like yes or no also . so , if i have probabilities forsomething i can easily convert them to yes or no answers through some thresholding which we willsee in the logistics regression methodology when we describe that . so , while we do not lose theability to categorically say if a data belongs to a particular class or not by modeling this probability .on the other hand we get a benefit of getting a nuanced answer instead of just saying yes or no .so , the question then is how does one model these probabilities ? so , let us go back and look at thepicture that we had before let us say this is x and x . remember that this hyper plane wouldtypically have this form here the solution is written in the vector form , if i want to expand it in termsof x and x what i could do is i could write this as p x . so , this could be theequation of this line in this dimensional space . now , one idea might be just to say this itself is aprobability and then let us see what happens . the difficulty with this is this p of x is not boundedbecause its just a linear function whereas , you know that the probability has to be bounded betweenand . so , we have to find some function which is bounded between and . the reason why weare still talking about this linear function is because this is the decision boundary . so , what we aretrying to do here is really instead of just looking at this decision boundary and then saying yes andno and . what we are trying to do is we are trying to use this equation itself to come up with someprobabilistic interpretation that is a reason why we are still sticking to this equation and trying to seeif we can model probabilities as a function of this equation which is the hyper plane . so , you couldthink of something slightly different and then say look instead of saying p x is this let me say login this case you will notice that it is bounded only on one side in other words if i write logwill ensure that p x never becomes negative . however , on the positive side p x can go tothat again is a problem because we need to bound p x between and . so , this is an importantthing to remember . so , it only bounds this one side . so , is that something more sophisticated we cando .the next idea is to write p x as what is called a sigmoidal function the sigmoidalfunction as relevance in many areas . so , this is a function that is used in neural networks and othervery interesting applications . so , the sigmoid has an interesting form which is shown here . now , letus look at this form right here . i want you to notice two things number is still we are trying to stickthis hyper plane equation into the probability expression because that is a decision surface .remember intuitively somehow we are trying to convert that hyper plane into a probabilityinterpretation . so , that is the reason why we are still sticking to this x. now , let us look at thisequation and then see what happens . so , if you take this argument x. so , that argumentdepending on the value of x you take could go all the way from to right . so , just take a singlevariable case if i write let us say just variable x not a vector . now , if is positive if youtake x to be a very very large value this number will become very large if is negative if you take xto very very large value in the positive side this number will become . and similarly if takes theother values you can correspondingly choose x to be positive or negative and then make thisunbounded between to . so , we will see what happens to this function when x isyou would get this to be divided by or you can just think of this as very large number . so ,in that case the numerator will become and the denominator will become . so , on the lowerside this expression will be bounded by . now , if you take x to be a very large positivenumber , then the numerator will be a very very large positive number and the denominator will bethat very large positive number . so , this will be bounded by on the upper side . so , now from theequation for the hyper plane we have been able to come up with a definition of a probability whichmakes sense which is bounded between and . so , its an important idea to remember . by doingthis what we are doing is the following , if we were not using this probability all that we will do is welook at this equation and whenever a new point comes in we will evaluate this x. and thenbased on whether its positive or negative we are going to say yes or no right . now , what hashappened is instead of that this number is put back into this expression and depending on whatvalue you get you get a probabilistic interpretation that is a beauty of this idea here . you canrearrange this in this form and then say x the reason why i show you this form isbecause the left hand side could be interpreted as log of odds ratio which is an idea that is used inseveral places . so , that is the connection here .now , we have this probabilities andremember if you were to write this hyper plane equation as the way we wrote in the last few slides. the job of identifying a classifier as far as we are concerned is done when we identifyvalues for the parameters , and . so , we still have to figure out what are the values for this .once we have a value for this any time i get a new point i simply put it into the p of x equation thatwe saw in the last slide and then get a probability right . so , this still needs to be identified . andobviously , if we are looking at a classification problem where i have this on this side and starts on thisside , i want to identify these , , and such a way that this classification problem issolved . so , i need to have some objective for identifying these values right . remember in theoptimization lectures i told you that all machine learning techniques can be interpreted in somesense as an optimization problem . so , here again we come back to the same thing and then we saylook we want to identify this hyper plane , but i need to have some objective function that i can useto identify these values . so , these , and will become the decision variables , but i stillneed an objective function . and as we discussed before when we are talking about the optimizationtechniques the objective function has to reflect what we want to do with this problem . so , here is anobjective function looks little complicated , but i will explain this as we go along . so , i said in theoptimization lectures we could look at maximizing or minimizing . in this case what we are going tosay is i want to find values for , and such that this objective is maximized . so , take aminute to look at this objective and then see why someone might want to do something like this . so ,when i look at this objective function let us say i again draw this and then let us say i have thesepoints on one side and the other points on the other side . so , let us call this class and let us callthis class . so , what i would like to do is i want to convert this decision function into probabilities .so , the way i am going to think about this is when i am on this line i should have the probabilitybeing equal to . which basically says that if i am on the line i can not make a choice between classand class because the probability is exactly . . so , i can not say anything about it . now , what iwould like to do is you can interpret it in many ways one thing would be to say as i go away from thisline in this direction i want the probability of the data belonging to class to keep decreasing . theminute that the probability that the data belongs to class keeps decreasing that automaticallymeans since there are only classes and this is a binary classification problem , the probability thatthe data belongs to class keeps increasing . so , if you think of this interpretation where as i go fromhere . so , here the probability that the data point belongs to class let us say is . , then basically itcould either belong to class or class . and if it is such that the probability keeps decreasing here ofthe data point belonging to class then it has to belong to class . so , that is a basic idea . so , inother words we could say the probability function that we define before should be such thatwhenever a data point belongs to class and i put that into that probability expression i want a smallprobability . so , you might interpret that probability as the probability that the data belongs to classfor example . and whenever i take a data point from this side and put it into that probability functionthen i want the probability to be very high because i want that is the probability that the databelongs to class . so , that is a basic idea . so , in other words we can paraphrase this and then say forany data point on this side belonging to class , we want to minimize p x when x is substituted intothat probability function and for any point on this side when we substitute these data points into theprobability function we want to maximize that probability . so , if you look at this here what this says isif this data point belongs to class then y i is . so , whenever a data point belongs to classanything to the power is so this will vanish . so , in the product there will be functions of this formwhich will be p of x i and because y i is this will become . so , this will become something to thepower . so , this term will vanish and the only thing that will remain is p xi . so , if we try tomaximize p xi , then that is equivalent to minimizing p xi . so , for all the points that belong toclass we are minimizing p xi . now , let us look at the other case of a data point belonging to classin which case y i is . so , so this term will be something to the power which will become .so , it kind of drop out . so , the only thing that will remain is p xi now yi is , so power it will be justleft with p of xi . and since this data belongs to class i want this probability to be very large . so ,when i maximize this it will be a large number . so , you have to think carefully about this equationthere are many things going on here number that this is a multiplication of the probabilities foreach of the data points . so , this includes data points from class and class . the other thing thatyou should remember is let us say i have a product of several numbers , if i am guaranteed that everynumber is positive right then the product will be maximized when each of these individual numbersare maximized . so , that is a principal that is also operating here that is why we do this product of allthe probabilities . however , if a data point belongs to class i want probability to be high . so , theindividual term is just written as p xi , so this is high for class . when a data point belongs to class istill want this number to be high that means , this number will be small . so , it automatically takescare of this as far as class and class are concerned . so , while this looks little complicated this iswritten in this way because its easier to write this as expression . now let us take a simple exampleto see how this will look . let us say i have class . i have data points x and x and class . i havedata points x and x . so , this objective function when its written out would look something like this .so , when we take let us say these points belonging to class , then i said the only thing that will beremaining is here . so , this will be p x , for the second data point it will be p x , then for thedata third data point will be p x and for the fourth data point it will be p x . so , this would be theexpression from here . so , now , when we maximize this then since p of xs are bounded betweenand this is a positive number this is a positive number positive number positive number and if theproduct has to be maximized , then each number has to be individually maximized that means , thishas to be maximized . so , it will go closer and closer to the closer to it is better . so , you noticethat to x would be optimized to belong in class similarly x would be optimized to belong in classand when you come to these numbers you would see that this would be a large number if p x isa small number . so , p x basically means that x is optimized to be in class and similarly x isoptimized to be in class . so , this is an important idea that you have to understand in terms of howthis objective function is generated .now , one simple trick you can do is take that objectivefunction and take a log of that and then maximize it . so , if i am maximizing a positive number x thenthat is equivalent to maximizing log x also . so , whenever this is maximized that will also bemaximized . the reason why you do this it makes the product into some makes it looks simple . so ,remember from our optimization lectures we said we are going to maximize this objective . so , wealways write this objective in terms of decision variables and the decision variables in this case are, and as we described before . so , what happens is each of these probability expressions ifyou recall from your previous slides will have these variables and xi are the points that are alreadygiven , so you simply substitute them into this expression . so , this whole expression would become afunction of , and right . now , we have come back to our familiar optimization territorywhere we have this function which is a function of these decision variables this needs to bemaximized and this is an unconstrained maximization problem because we are not putting anyconstraints or , and . so , they can take any value that we want . and also the fact that the waythe probability is defined this would also become a non linear function . so , basically we have a nonlinear optimization problem in several decision variables and you could use any non linearoptimization technique to solve this problem . and when you solve this problem what you get isbasically the hyper plane . so , in this case its a dimensional problem . so , we have parameters nowif there is an n dimensional problem if you have let us say n variables . so , i will have something like.. n n this will be an n variable problem there are n decision variables . thesen decision variables will be identified through this optimization solution . and for any new datapoint once we put that data point into the p x function that sigmoidal function that we havedescribed , then you would get the probability that it belongs to class or class . so , this is the basicidea of logistic regression . in the next lecture i will take a very simple example with several datapoints to show you how this works in practice and i will also introduce a notion of regularizationwhich would help in avoiding over fitting when we do logistics regression . i will explain what overfitting means in the next lecture also . with that you will have a theoretical understanding of howlogistics regression works and in a subsequent lecture doctor hemant kumar would illustrate howto use this technique in our on a case study problem . so , that will give you the practical experienceof how to use logistics regression and how to make sense out of the results that you get from usinglogistics regression on an example problem . thank you and i will see you in the next lecture .letus continue our lectures on algorithms for data science . we will now see some algorithms that areused in what we call as the classification problems i will first start by discussing classificationproblems again . we have done this before , but i thought i will come back to this for this part of thelectures and then i will tell you the types of classification problems quickly . and then describe somecharacteristic that we look for in these classification problems and , then i will teach three techniqueswhich could be used in solving classification problems . in general many of the techniques that areused in classification can also be modified or used for function approximation problems . so , this issomething that you should keep in mind . similarly , techniques used for function approximationproblems can also be modified and used for classification problems . nonetheless in this series oflectures we will look at these algorithms and then give them a classification flavor and that wouldcome to both the way we describe the algorithm and also the case studies that are used with thealgorithms .so , let us look at what classification means . so , we had described this before . if i amgiven data that is label two different classes and that is what i start with , then if i am able to developan algorithm which will be able to distinguish these classes and how do you know that this algorithmdistinguishes these classes . whenever a new data point comes if i send it through my algorithm andif i originally had k different labels the algorithm should label the new point into one of the k groups .so , that is typically what is called a classification problem . so , pictorially we represent here . here wesay here is a group of data , here is a group of data . now , if i were to derive a classifier , then line likethis could be a classifier and remember we have seen this in linear algebra and before . i have twohalf spaces and i could say this half space is class and this half space is class . now , you noticethat while i have data points only in a small region and this classifier has derived an unbounded aclassification region . you could come up with classifiers which are bounded also we will discuss thatlater . but , here now if i get a new point if i get a point like this then i would like the classifier to saythat this point most likely belongs to the class which is denoted by star points here . and , that is whatwould happen and similarly , if i have a point here i would like that to be classified to this class and soon . now , we can think of two types of problems the simpler type of classification problem is what iscalled the binary classification problem . basically binary classification problems are where there aretwo classes , yes and no . so , examples are for example , if you have data for a process or anequipment and then you might want to simply classify this data as belonging to normal behavior ofthe equipment or an abnormal behavior of the equipment . so , that is just binary . so , if i get a newdata , i want to say from this data if the equipment is working properly or it is not working properly .another example would be if let us say you get some tissue sample and you characterize that samplethrough certain means and then using those characteristics you want to classify this as a cancerousor non cancerous sample . so , that is another binary classification example . now , more complicatedversion of this problem is what we call as a multi class classification problem , where i have labelsfrom several different classes . so here i have just two , but in a general case in a multi class problemi might have k classes . classic example again going back to the equipment example that we justdescribed instead of saying if the equipment is just normal or abnormal , if we could actually furtherresolve this abnormality into several different fault classes let us say fault , fault , fault then ifyou put all of this together normal fault , fault , fault now you have four class problem . so , if ihave annotated data where the data is labeled as being normal or as being collected when fault foccurred or as having been collected when fault f occurs , fault f occurs and so on , thenwhenever a new data point comes in we could label it as normal in which case we do not have to doanything or if we could label it as one of these fault classes , then we could take appropriate actionbased on what fault class it belongs to . now , from a classification viewpoint the complexity of theproblem typically depends on how the data is organized . now , if the data is organized let us talkabout just binary classification problem and many of these ideas translate to multi class classificationproblems . in a binary classification problem if the data is organized like it is shown in this picturehere we call this data as linearly separable where i could use hyper plane to separate this data intotwo sides of the hyper plane or two half spaces and that gives me perfect classification . so , these aretypes of problems which are called linearly separable problems . so , in cases where you are lookingat linearly separable problems the classification problem then becomes one of identifying the hyperplane that would classify the data . so , these i would call as simpler problems in binary classification .however , i also have a picture on the right hand side this also turns out to be a binary classificationproblem . however , if you look at this , this data and this data both belong to class and this databelongs to class . now , however , you try to draw a hyper plane so , if i were to draw a hyper planehere and then say this is all class and this is class then these points are classified correctly , thesepoints are classified correctly and these points are poorly classified or misclassified . now , if i were tocome up similarly with the hyper plane like this you will see similar arguments where these arepoints that will be poorly classified . so , whatever you do if you try to come up with something likethis , then these are points that would be misclassified . so , there is no way in which i can simplygenerate a hyper plane that would classify this data into two regions . however , this does not meanthis is not a solvable problem , it only means that this problem is not linearly separable or what i havecalled here as linearly non separable problems . so , you need to come up with not a hyper plane , butvery simply in layman terms curved surfaces and here for example , if you were able to generate acurve like this and then you could use that as a decision function . and then say on one side of thecurve i have data point belonging to class and on the other side i have data points belonging toclass . so , in general when we look at classification problems we look at whether they are linearlyseparable or not separable . and , from data science viewpoint this problem right here becomes lotharder because when we look at a decision function in a linearly separable problem we know thefunctional form it is a hyper plane and we are simply going to look for that in the binary classificationcase . however , when you look at non linear decision boundaries there are many many functionalforms that you can look at and then see which one works . for example , one could maybe come upwith something like this or one could maybe come up with things where i just do something like thisand so on . so , there are many many possibilities . now , which of these possibilities would you use issomething that the algorithm by itself has to figure out . so , since there are many possibilities thisbecome harder problems to solve . so , all of this we described for binary classification problems .many of these ideas also translate to multi class problems for example , if you take let us say i havedata from three classes like this here . so , these are three classes now , if i want to separate thesethree classes and then ask myself if i can separate these two through linear methods . now , it isslightly different from the binary classification problem because we needed only one decisionfunction and based on one decision function we could say whether a point belongs to class or class. in multi class problems you could come up with more decision functions and more decisionfunctions would mean more hyper planes and then you can use some logic after that to be able toidentify a data point as belonging to a particular class . so , when i have something like this here let ussay this is class , this is class and this is class . what i could possibly do is the following . i could dohyper plane like this and a hyper plane like this . now , when i have these two hyper planes , then ihave basically four combinations that are possible . so , for example , if i take hyper plane , hyperplane as the two decision functions then i could generate four regions . for example , i couldgenerate plus plus , plus minus , minus plus , minus minus . so , you know that for a particular hyperplane you have two half spaces a positive half space and a negative half space . so , when i havesomething like this here then basically what it says is the point is in the positive half space of bothhyper plane and hyper plane . and , when i have a point like this says the point is in the positivehalf space of hyper plane and the negative half space of hyper plane . and , in this case you wouldsay it is in the negative half space of both the hyper planes . so , now , you see that when you go tomulti class problems if we were to use more than one hyper plane and then depending on the hyperplanes you get a certain number of possibilities . so , in this case when i use these two hyper planes igot basically four spaces as i show here . so , in this multi class problem which is i have three classesif i could have data belonging to one class falling here , data belonging to another class falling hereand let us say the data belonging to the third class falling here . for example , then i could use thesetwo hyper planes and the corresponding decision functions to be able to classify this three classproblem . so , when we describe multi class problems , we look at more hyper planes and thendepending on how we derive these hyper planes we could have these classes being separated interms of half spaces or a combination of half spaces . so , this is another important idea that oneshould remember when we go to a multi class problems . so , when you solve multi class problemswe can treat them directly as multi class problems or you could solve many binary classificationproblems and come up with logic . on the other side of these classification results to label the resultinto one of the multiple classes that you have . so , these give you some basic conceptual ideas onhow classification problems are solved particularly binary classification problems and multi classclassification problems . the key ideas that i said that we want to remember here or whether theseproblems are linearly separable or linearly non separable and in the linearly non separable problemsthere are multiple options . one way to address the multiple options is through a beautiful ideacalled kernel methods where this notion of checking several non linear surfaces can still be solvedunder certain conditions on the non linear functions that we want to check using simple i would i amgoing to call it linear methods and i will explain this later in the course . so , the idea here is that ifyou choose certain forms of non linear functions which obey certain rules and those rules typicallyare called you know kernel tricks then you could use whatever we use in terms of hyper planes ,those ideas for solving those class of problems . so , kernel methods are important when we havelinearly non separable problems , ok. so , with this i just wanted to give you a brief idea on theconceptual underpinnings of classification algorithms . the math behind all of this is what we will tryto teach at least some of it is what we will try to teach in this course . and , in more advancedmachine learning courses you will see the math behind all of this in much more detail . so , as far asclassification is concerned we are going to start with an algorithm called logistic regression , we willfollow that up with knn classifier , then we will teach something called k means , clustering k meanscome under what are called clustering techniques . now , typically you can use these clusteringtechniques in a function approximation or classification problems and i am going to teach thesetechniques and use case studies that give distinct classification flavor to the results that we are goingto see using these techniques . so , i will start logistic regression in the next lecture and i hope to seeyou then . thank you .welcome everybody to this last lecture on regression . in this lecture i amgoing to introduce a concept called cross validation which is a very useful thing in model building .the main purpose of cross validation is to select what we call the number of meta parameters orhyper parameters of a model . although we have not introduced principal component analysis in thisseries of lectures , nevertheless when you learn it in a higher advanced course on data analytics , youwill come across this idea of principal components and one of the problems in principal componentanalysis is to select the number of principal components that are relevant . we call this hyperparameter or a meta parameter of the model . similarly later on in this course you will come acrossclustering in particular you will come across k means clustering and here again you have to choosethe number of clusters required to group the data and the number of clusters is called the metaparameter of the clustering modeling . similarly , if your building a non linear regression model forexample , let us take a polynomial regression model , where the dependent variable y is written as apolynomial function of the independent variable x. let us assume there is only one variable x , youcan write the regression model non linear regression model as . . . . where , and soon higher powers of x. this is known as a polynomial model notice this the polynomial model canalso be the parameters of this model can be obtained using multi linear regression . if you take x as avariable , x as a different variable and xn as a different variable computed from data that you aregiven , treat them as different variables then you can use multi linear regression methods in order toestimate the parameters beta naught beta and so on with the beta n. here again we have to decidehow many powers of x we have to choose . so , if you choose higher powers of x , then correspondingto each power you got a extra parameter that you need to estimate . for example , in this case youhave n parameters if you have chosen , x power n as your highest degree of the polynomial . thechoice of the degree of the polynomial to fit is again the meta parameter of the non linear regressionmodel . so , in all of this case is you have to find out the optimal number of meta parameter , optimalnumber of parameters of the model that you need to use in order to obtain the best model . now ,you might think that it is easy to actually obtain this by looking at the mean squared error of thetraining data . so , for example , if you take this polynomial model fit it and compute the mean squarederror in the training data , that is nothing , but the difference between y and y hat after you havefound out the best fit parameters of beta naught beta up to beta n , you can predict for every databy substituting the value of x x squared and so on and you predict y hat and you compute thedifference y y hat and some over squared of all this is called the mean squared error ok. so , themean squared error of the training data you might think is useful as a measure for finding theoptimal number of parameters , but that is not true . because as you increase the number ofparameters if you keep adding higher order terms , you will find that the mean squared errordecreases . so , ultimately you can get the mean squared error to decrease to as you increase thenumber of parameters , this is called over fitting . so , you can always get the mean squared error ofthe training data to by choosing sufficient number of parameters in the model . therefore , youcan not use the training data set in order to find out the best number of optimal number ofparameters to use in the model . so , we do something call cross validation , this has to be done on adifferent data set that is not used in the training . we call this the validation data set and we use thevalidation data set in order to decide the optimal number of parameters of meta parameters of thismodel . so , we will use this polynomial regression model as an example throughout in order toillustrate this idea of cross validation .so , schematically what happens when youactually increase the model complexity of the number of meta parameters of the model . so , you willfind that the mean squared error on the test set continuously decreases ok. so , we will goes to a aswe said on the training set . however , on the validation set what will happen is , if you look at themean squared error on the validation set that will initially decrease as you increase the number ofparameters , but beyond the certain point , the mean squared error on the validation set will startincreasing . so , the optimal number of parameters you should choose of the model complexity is youchoose corresponds to the minimum value of the mean squared error on the validation set and thisis called the optimal model . if you choose less number of parameters than the optimal model , wecall this under fitting on the other hand if you use more parameters in your model , then the optimalmodel value is called over fitting . so , over fitting basically means you are using unnecessarily moreparameters than necessary to explain the data on the other hand if you use less parameters , youactually are not sufficiently your model is not going to be that accurate . typically there aremeasures for determine the quality of the model . one is called the bias in your prediction error andif you know if you increase the number of parameters of the model this bias squared of the bias termwill start decreasing however , the variability in your model predictions that will start increasing asyou increase the model complexity of number of parameters . so , it is basically the tradeoff betweenthese two that gives rise to this minimum value of the mse on the validation set that is what you arelooking for . so , you want this optimal tradeoff between the bias which keeps reducing as youincrease the number of parameters and the variance which keeps increasing as the number ofparameters of the model increases . so , this is what we are going to find out by cross validation .so , if you have a large data set then you can always divide this data set into parts , use for trainingtypically percent of the data samples you will use for training and the remaining you will set a partfor the validation . so , let us call the samples that you used for training as x , y , x , y and so onwhere x represents the independent variable y the dependent variable and the validation set wewill denote it by the symbols x , i and y , i where there are nt observations in the validation set . so ,typically as i said if you have a large number of samples , you can set up are the percent of thesamples for training and the remaining percent you can use for validation . now you can always ofcourse , define the mean squared error in the training set after building the model . so , this isnothing , but the difference between the measured observed value of the dependent variable thepredicted value after you estimated the parameters let say using least squares regression . so , this isthe prediction error on the training data , square overall the samples and taken the average . that isthe mean square error that we have seen before . you can do a similar thing for the validation setalso , you can take the difference between the measured value or observed value in the validationsample set the predicted value for the validation samples and again you can take the sum squareddifference between the observation the predicted value for the validation set , squared over allsamples and one the averaged average value . so , that is called the mean squared error on the test orvalidation . so , this particular term as i said the mse on training is not useful for the purpose ofdeciding on the optimal number of parameters of the model however , this test mse test or themean squared error or the validation data set is the one that we are going to used for finding theoptimal number of parameters of the model .so , as i said if you have large number ofamount of samples then you can actually divide it into a training set a validation set for finding theoptimal number of parameters of the model , but and finally , if you want to assess how good youroptimal model is you can run it on a test set . so , typically you take the data set and you divide intothree parts one the training set the validation set where you are trying to use for finding the optimalnumber of parameters and finally , the test set for to see whether them optimal model you have builtis good enough . we will not worry about the test set in this particular lecture we will only worryabout this validation set . unfortunately , if you do not have large number of samples . so , you wouldactually generate validation set from the training set itself and we will see how to do this using whatis called k fold cross validation and bootstrapping and so on . so , this is what we will do if you do nothave enough data . we will first look at the case of where you have sufficient number of samples . so ,essentially you have n samples and you can divide into a training set consisting of n t samples andthe remaining samples you actually used for validation this is a hold out sample as we call it . so , youbuild a model using only the training set and after your build the model you test it , find the meansquared error on the validation set do this for every choice of the parameter . so , if you have forexample , a polynomial model , you will first see whether a linear model is good , then you will checkas quadratic model and a cubic model and so , on you keep increasing the degree of the polynomialand for each case build the model using the training set and see how the mse of that particularmodel is on the validation set , and plot this mse on the validation set as a function of the degree ofthe polynomial . so , this is what we are going to do for one of the examples and then see how we pickthe optimal number of parameters .so , here is the case example of a mileage of someautomobiles and the horse power of the engine . so , essentially this particular data set containsdata points , actually this is sufficiently large , but we are going to assume this is not large enough andwe use the validation and cross validation approach on this data set . so , we have data points ormore of automobiles different types of automobiles , for which the horse power and the mileage isgiven . we are going to fit a polynomial or a non linear model between mileage and horse power weof course , we can also dry a linear model , but a polynomial model means you can also try quadraticand cubic models and so on so forth . so , this what we are going to illustrate . so , as we increase thedegree of the polynomial , here what we have shown is the mean squared error on the validation set .so , suppose we take percent of this is for training and the remaining percent data pointsare so , for validation and we look at the mean squared error on the validation set for differentchoices of the polynomial order . in this case the first polynomial degree is one implies we are takinga linear model and for two implies were to fitting a quadratic model , for three implies a cubic modeland a quadratic model and so on so forth and we are tried polynomial up to degree and we areshown how the mean squared error on the validation data set is as you increase the polynomialorder . you can see very clearly that the value reaches more or less a minimum at to and after whichit does not significantly changed . typically this should actually start increasing , but in mostexperimental data sets you will find that the mean squared error on the validation set flat ins out anddoes not significantly decrease beyond the point . so , you can choose the optimal order degree ofthe polynomial to fit in this particular case as to , that is a quadratic model fixed this data very wellthat is what you actually conclude from this particular cross validation mechanism . of course , on theright hand side we have shown plots for different choices of the training set . for example , if youchoose data points out of this randomly and perform regression polynomial regression fordifferent polynomial degree and plot the mse you will get let us say one curve in this case let us saythe yellow curve you get here . similarly , if you take another random set and do it you will getanother curve . so , these different curves correspond to different random samples taken from thisthing as training and the remaining is used as testing . you can see that as you increase thedegree of the polynomial the variability or the estimates or the range of the estimates is very verylarge . so , it indicates that if you over fit you will get a very high variability whereas , on the otherhand if you choose order of the polynomial or you find that the variability is not that significantcomparatively . so , typically if you over fit the model you will find high variability in your estimatesthat you obtain or the mean squared error values that you obtain ok .all this is goodif you have a large data set what happens when you have extremely small data set and you can notdivided into training and a validation set ? you do not have sufficient samples for training . typicallyyou need a reasonable number of samples in the training set to build the model therefore , in thiscase we can not set a part or divided into a what i call division and therefore , you have to dosome of the strategies . so , these strategies what are called cross validation using k fold crossvalidation or a bootstrap that we will see . here again we will predict the performance of the modelon the validation set , but the validation set is not separated from the training set precisely , but onthe other hand it is drawn from the training set and we will see how we do this . so , these methods kfold cross validation is useful when we have very few samples for a training .so , i willfirst start with leave one out cross validation what is called loocv . in this case we have n samples asi said n is not very large may be or samples we have for training . so , what we will do is , youfirst leave out the first sample and use the remaining samples for building your model that means ,you will use samples , , up to n , it to build your model and once you have build the model youtest the performance of the model or predict for this sample that you have left out and you will getan mse for this sample . and similarly in the next round what you do is leave out the second sampleand choose all the remaining for training and then use that model for predicting on the sample thatis left out . so , in every time you build the model by leaving out one sample from this list of n samplesand predict the performance of the model on the left out sample . this you will do for every choice ofthe model parameter . for example , if you are building a non linear regression model , you will buildregression model using let say only beta naught and beta the linear term and predict a mse on thisleft out sample . you will also build a model using the same training set quadratic model andpredicted on this and so on so forth so , that you will get the mse for the left out sample for allchoices of the parameters you want to try out . do this with the second sample being left out and thethird sample being left out in term ok. so , that every sample has a chance of being in the validationset and also be being part of the training set in the other cases . so , once you have done this for aparticular choice of the model parameters , let say you have building a linear model . you find outthe sum squared value of the prediction errors on the left out sample over all the samples . forexample , you would have got a mse for this , mse for this , mse for this when the first sample secondsample and third sample was left out that you are cumulating it here and taking the average of allthat . this you do repeatedly for every choice of the parameters in the model . for example , thelinear , the quadratic , the cubic and so on so forth and you get the mean squared error or crossvalidation error for different values of the parameters which you can plot .here againwe have shown the mean squared error for different choice of the degree of the polynomial for thesame data set , in this case we have use to left leave one out cross validation strategy that means , ifyou have samples , we would have left out one sample build the model using samplespredicted on the sample that is left out , do this in term average over all of this for every choice ofthese parameter degree of the polynomial and mean squared error we have plotted . again we seethat the mse on the cross validation leave one out cross validation reaches more or less a minimumfor a degree of polynomial equal after which it just keeps remains more or less flat . so , the optimalin this case is also indicated as a second order a polynomial is best for this particular example .so , leave one out cross validation as an advantage as compare to the validation set approach whenare we can show that it does not over estimate the test error rate as much as the validation setapproach ok. it is comparatively expensive to implement because you are building the model n timesone for each sample being left out and you have to repeat this for all choices of the hyperpara modelparameter . for example you have to do this for the linear model , the quadratic model , the cubicmodel and so and so forth . so , you have not only have to do this n times , but you have to do this ntimes for every choice of the number of parameters of the model . so , it is quite a lot of computationthat it takes . in general it may actually sometimes fit the model which is slightly more than theoptimal model by not always , but sometimes it is also possible that the leave one out cross validationprocedure over fits the model .we can also do what is called the k fold crossvalidation , where here instead of leaving one out we first divide the entire training set into k folds ork groups . so , let us say the first group contains let say the first four data samples , the second groupcontains the next four and so and so forth and you have divided this entire n samples into k groups .now instead of leaving one out we will leave one group out . so , for example , in this first case we willleave the first four samples they belonging to group and use the remaining samples and build amodel for whatever choice of the parameters where we have use let say we have building a linearmodel , we will use the remaining groups build the linear model and then predict for the set ofsamples in group that was left out and compute the mse for this group . similarly , in the next roundwhat we will do is leave group out build the model let say the linear model that we are buildingwith the remaining groups and then find the prediction error for group and so on so forth until wefind the prediction error for group k and then we average over all these groups . so , the mse in thiscase for all groups whether there are k groups and by k that will be the cross validation error forleave this k fold cross validation . now , you can you have to repeat this for every choice of theparameter you have done this for the linear model you have to do this for the quadratic model , cubicmodel and so on so forth and then you can plot this cross validation error for leave for this k foldcross validation .notice that if k equals n you are essentially going back to leave oneout cross validation in practice you can choose the number of groups equal to either or and do afold cross validation or fold cross validation . this is obviously , less expensive computationally ascompared to leave one out cross validation and as you see that leave one out cross validation we willdo a model fitting n times for every choice of the parameter whereas , k fold cross validation will dothe model building k times for every choice of the parameter .again we haveillustrated this k fold cross validation for this mileage auto data , again we plot the mse for differentdegrees of the polynomial . we have used to fold cross validation and we are plotting this errorand we will see that here also the minimal error occurs at showing that the quadratic model isprobably best for this particular data after which the error actually essentially flat and so . so , crossvalidation is a important method or a approach for finding the optimal number of parameters of amodel , this happens in clustering , this will happen in non linear model fitting and principlecomponent analysis and so on and its useful later on you will see in the clustering lectures , the use ofcross validation for determining the optimal number of clusters . thank you .good morning . inthe previous lecture , we saw different measures that we can use to assess whether the linear modelthat we have fitted is good or not . for example , we can use the r squared value and if we find thatthe r squared value is close to plus one we can maybe accept the fact that the linear model is good .we can also check based on the f statistic whether the reduced model is better than the model withthe slope parameter . so , if we reject the null hypothesis there again we may conclude that the linearmodel is acceptable . we can also do this by testing the significance of the slope parameter we canlook at the confidence interval for the slope parameter and if that does not include , then maybewe can accept a linear model . but , all of these measures are not sufficient they only provide aninitial indicator i will show you some data set which shows that that these measures are notcompletely sufficient to accept a linear model . we will use other diagnostic measure to conclusivelyaccept or reject a linear model fit . so , let us look at a data set provided by anscombe .we haveseen this before in the when we analyzed statistical measures in one of the lectures . the anscombedata set is consists of four data sets each one of them having data points , x versus y. they aresynthetically constructed to illustrate the point . for example , these four data sets are plotted xversus y , the scatter plot is given first data set here , second , third and fourth . and , in all of these ifyou actually look at it look at the scatter plot we may say that look a linear model is adequate for thefirst data set and perhaps for the third data set , but the second data set indicates that the linearmodel may not be a good choice , a long linear model or a quadratic model may be a better fit . thelast dataset is a very poorly designed data set , you can see that the experiment is conducted only attwo distinct values of x you have one value of x here for which you have experiments conductedyou have got different y values for the same x. and , then you have one more experimentalobservation at a different value of x. so , you should in this case you should not attempt to fit a linearmodel with the data , instead you should ask the experimenter to go and collect data at differentvalues of x then come back and try to check whether that is valid . unfortunately , when we actuallyapply linear regression to these data sets and then find the slope and the intercept parameter wefind that in all four cases we get the same intercept value of you can see that all four data sets youget a value of and you also get the same slope parameter which is . in all four cases . so , theregression model if you fit to any of these data four data sets you will get the same estimate of theintercept and slope . furthermore , you get the same standard error of it which is . for interceptand point one for the slope and if you run a confidence interval for the slope parameter , you mayend up accepting that this slope is acceptable for all four cases and you may conclude incorrectlyconclude that the linear model is adequate . you can actually run the r squared value , it will be thesame for all four data sets you can run the a hypothesis test whether a reduced model is acceptablecompared to a model with the slope parameter again you will reject a null hypothesis using the fstatistic and you may conclude for all four cases you get the same identical result that a linear modelis a good fit . clearly , it is not so . one can of course , do scatter plots and try to judge it in thisparticular case because it is a univariate example , but when you have many independent variablesthen you have to examine several such scatter plots and that may not be very easy . so , if you assumethere are independent variables you have to examine such plots of y versus x and it may notbe possible for you to make a visual conclusion from that . so , we will use other kinds of plots calledresidual plots which will enable us to do this whether it is a univariate regression problem or amultivariate regression problem . we will see what these are .so , the main questionsthat we are trying to ask now whether a linear model is adequate ? we have has some measures wehave seen , but they are not adequate . we will use additional things and when we needed linearregression we did make additional assumptions although they have not been stated explicitly . weassumed that the errors that corrupt the independent variables are normally distributed and theyhave identical variance . only under this these assumptions can you use a least squares method toperform linear regression that way you can at least prove that the least squares method has somenice properties . so , we do not know whether this is true and we have to verify whether the errorsare normally distributed and have equal variance . we also may have a problem of data containingoutliers which we may have to remove and that also we have to solve . additional questions may bethat some observations may have unduly high influence than others and we want to identify suchpoints and perhaps remove them or at least be aware of this . and , lastly of course , a linear modelmay be inadequate so , we have to try and fit a non linear model . so , i am going to only address thefirst two questions whether the errors are normally distributed ? whether they have equal varianceand whether there are outliers in the data ? these two things we will address using residual plots . so ,let us do this illustrate with the anscombe data set and also other data set .so , oneway of assessing whether there are outliers or whether linear model is adequate or not is using whatwe call the residual plots and let us see what these residuals are . by definition , a residual is thedifference between the measured value of the dependent variable the predicted value of thedependent variable for each sample . so , yi represents the measured value , y is the predicted valueusing the linear regression model that we have fitted . so , that difference is designated as ei and it iscalled the residual and that is nothing , but the vertical distance between the fitted line and theobservation point . now , we can try to compute the statistical properties of these residuals and wewill be able to show that the variance of this these residuals are not all identical even though westarted with the assumption that all errors corrupting the measured values of the same variance , butif residual which is a result of the fit will not have the same variance for all data points . in fact , youcan show that the variance of the i th sample is sigma squared which represents the error in themeasured value of the dependent variable multiplied by one p ii , where p ii is divide by this . noticethat pii depends on the i th sample , numerator depends on the i th sample therefore , pii depends onthe i th sampled and varies with sample to sample . so , the variance of the residual will not beidentical for all samples , it is given by this quantity . we also can show that the residuals are notindependent even though we assume that the errors corrupting the measurements are allindependent . the residuals in the samples are not independent and they have a correlationcovariance and that covariance can be shown to be given by this quantity . the reason for thevariance not being identical of the residuals or their them being correlated is because you notice thatthis y we have actually have here is a result of the regression . it depends on all variables , allmeasurements it is not depend only on the i th measurement . this predicted value is a function ofall the observations and that because of that it introduces a correlations between the different aresiduals and also imparts different variance to different residuals . and so , having derived this noticethat even if we do not have a priori knowledge of sigma square which is the variance of error in themeasurements we have we can estimate this quantity . we have already seen this in the previouslecture . we can replace this by sse by n which is an estimate of the sigma square and substitutethis to get an estimated variance of each residual .we will standardize theseresiduals , where what we mean by standardization is to divide the residual by its standard deviationestimated standard deviation ok. all of this can be computed from the data and therefore , you getfor each sample a standardized residual after performing the linear fit which is given by this quantity .now , you can also show that this particular quantity the standardized residual will have a tdistribution with n degrees of freedom . now , what these statistical properties allow you to knowperform test on the residuals which what we will use to identify outliers and also test whether thereis set the variances in the different measurements are identical or not .so , we willplot the residual what we call residual plots we will plot the residuals with respect to the predictedor fitted value of the dependent variable . remember , there is only one dependent variable , even ifthere are multiple independent variables we have only one dependent variable , we can plug theresiduals with respect to the predicted value of the dependent variable and the predicted values willobtain after the regression , remember . so , this is called the residual plot . what is called the residualversus the fitted or predicted value and this plot is very useful in testing the validity of the linearmodel in determining whether the errors are normally distributed , assumptions on errors are andwhether the variances of all errors are identical or not which is called a homoscedasticity case whichmeans the errors and all measured values are identical or the variance of the error in differentmeasured values are non identical which is called the heteroscedastic case or heteroscedastic error .so , let us see how each of these how the plot looks for each of these cases .now , letus plot the residual plots for the four data sets provided by anscombe . notice that we have done theregression model . regression model we computed all these parameters r squared confidence ,interval they all turned out to be identical . they gave us no clues whether the linear model is goodfor all four data sets or not . basically , they say they would say that the linear model is adequate , butwhen we do the residual plot here we are plotted the residual versus the i have plotted with respectto the independent variable . but , because it is a univariate case we are plotted with respect to theindependent variable , but technically you should plot the residual with respect to the predictedvalue of the dependent variable . remember , because we presume that the predicted variable islinearly dependent on x. in this case it may not matter , if the pattern will look the same you can try itout for yourself if you plot the residual with respect to the predicted value of the dependentvariable then you will get this kind of pattern of the residuals for the four data sets . the first datasetif you look at it exhibits no pattern . the residuals seem to be randomly distributed between this casebetween and plus and whereas , for the second dataset there is a distinct pattern , the residualslook like a quadratic like a parabola and so , therefore , there exists a pattern in the data set . for thethird data set basically you can say that there is no pattern except that our constant , more or lesslinear or constant . there seems to be a small bias because of the slope left in the residuals . dataset as we saw before , is a poorly designed experimental data set . all the y values are obtained at asingle x value and that is what the residuals are also showing the of the data points obtained thatthe same x x value or showing different different residuals and the one single residual at a differentx value showing something . so , from this you can not judge anything , all you can say is that theexperimental data set is very poorly designed and we need to get back to the experimenter and askhim to provide a different data set . now , based on this we can safely conclude that data set clearlylinear model is adequate all the measures previous measures also were satisfied and now theresidual plot also shows a random pattern which means or random or what we call no pattern , thenlinear model is adequate whereas , for data set by looking at the residual plot we can conclude thata linear model is inadequate should not be used for this data set . for the third data set , however , weknow there is one data point that is lying far away and perhaps that is the one that is causing all ofthis slightly linear pattern here . and , if we remove this outlier and retry it maybe this will thisresolved this problem will get resolved in linear model may be adequate for data set . for data setagain there is a distinct constant pattern and therefore , we can conclude that a linear model shouldnot be used . in fact , no model should be used between x and y because y it does not seem to bedependent on x here . so , the residual plot clearly gives the game away and it should be used alongwith other measures in order to finally , conclude that the linear model that were fitted for the data isacceptable or not . so , in this case data set certainly will accept , data set we will have to dofurther analysis , but for and we will completely reject the linear model .now , thetest for normality can also be done using the residuals . we have already seen the when we didstatistical analysis the notion of a probability plot where we plot the sample quantiles against thequantiles from the distribution with which we want to compare . so , if we want to compare whethera set of given a given set of data follows a certain distribution then we plot the sample quantilesfrom the quantiles drawn for that particular distribution against which we want to test this sample .so , in this case we want to test whether the residuals that we have the standardized residuals comefrom a standard normal distribution and therefore , we will take the quantiles from the standardnormal distribution and plot it . just to recap what do we mean by a quantile ? it is a percentile datavalue below which a certain percentage of data lies . for example , if you want to find given a data setwhat is the value below which percent of the data lies maybe . , here we are given whichmeans percent of the samples lie below . . percent of the samples lie below . and so onand so forth we have computed this . this we can plot against the standard normal values percentvalue probably where the probability between infinity and the value is percent and the valuebetween infinity and that value should be percent and so on so forth . those represents the xvalues corresponding to these probabilities and , we can use that plotted and then of course , beforecomputing these contexts we have arranged the data . so , we have seen this before i have just onlyrecapped this and we can use what is called a qqnorm function in r to actually do it if you give thedata set x and ask it to do a probability plot qqnorm will do this for you directly in r .so , this is a sample q q plot i have taken for some arbitrary random data set samples drawn from thestandard normal distribution and you can see that if you do the normal q q plot for the residualsafter fitting the regression line it seems to closely follow the degree line . so , the theoreticalquantiles computed from the standard normal distribution and the quantiles computed from thesample residuals standardized residuals follow on the follow fall on the degree line and therefore ,in this case we can safely conclude that the errors in the data come from a standard normaldistribution . so , a q q plot . if this thing is in does not happen , if we find the significant deviation ofthis quantiles from the degree line then a normal distribution assumption is incorrect whichmeans we have to modify the least squares objective function to actually accommodate this . it maynot have may or may not have a significant effect on the regression coefficient , but there are ways ofdealing with it which i will not go into .a third thing that we need to test is whetherthe residual variances , i am sorry , the error variances in the data are having a uniform variance or ihave different variances for different samples and again here what we do is look at the residual plotand standardized residuals versus the predicted values what you have to plot and if you do and lookat this thing it seems to be that the there is no particular trend in the residuals . for example , in theright hand side we find that the residuals close to when the number of values is and is spread isvery small whereas , when the number of crews is the spread is very high . so , the spread increasesor looks like a funnel when we actually look at the residuals whereas , such a effect is not found onthe data set corresponding to the left hand side thing . so , here i have plotted the standardizedresidual for two different data sets just to illustrate the type of figures you might get . if you get afigure such as in the left then we can safely conclude , that the errors in different measurements havethe same variance whereas , if you have a funnel type of effect then you will know that the errorswhere a variances increases as the value increases . so , it depends on the value itself which impliesthat you can not use a standard least squares method you should use a weighted least squaresmethod . so , data points which are corresponding to this these four should be given more weightand data points corresponding to this will be given less weight and we call that a weighted leastsquares that is the way we have to deal with what we call heteroskedastic errors of this guy . again , ihave i am not going to go into the whole thing i have just to illustrate that first the residual plots areused in order to verify the assumptions and if the assumptions are not valid , then we have correctionmechanisms to modify our regression procedure . but , linear this does not indicate a linear model isnot adequate the linear model adequacy test is basically based on the pattern . if there is no patternin the residuals you can go ahead and assume that the linear model fit is adequate as long as othermeasures are also satisfactory , but here it is related to the error variances and in this case we onlymodify the linear regression method and we still go with a linear model for these cases for this casessuch as the one shown on the right .the last thing that we need to do is also cleanout the data . we do not want to use data that have got large errors what we call outliers minuspoints which do not conform to the pattern that is found in the bulk of the data . and , the outlierscan be easily identified using hypothesis test of the residual for each sample , we have actually foundthe residual for each sample we have actually finally , found a standardized residual . so , thestandardized residual roughly follow we know it is follows a t distribution , but we can for largeenough number of samples we can assume that it follows a normal distribution . so , if we i use apercent level of significance we can run a test hypothesis test for each sample residual and if theresidual lies outside to plus , we can conclude that the sample is an outlier . so , for each samplewe test whether the sample standardized residual lies outside of this interval and if it is lies outsidethis interval we can conclude that that particular sample may be an outlier and remove it from a dataset . the only thing when we do outlier detection is this it may turn out that we do that first time wefit a regression and do an outlier detection we may find several residuals lying outside theconfidence interval to plus , percent confidence interval in which case we do not throw all thesamples out at the same time . we only throw out the one that is most offending which is we identifythe outlier that corresponds to the sample with the largest standard standardized residualmagnitude which of which is farthest away from or plus that is the one we take and remove it .once we remove that we again run a regression on the remaining samples and again run this outlierdetection test . so , we remove only one outlier at a time the reason for this is when we perform anoutlier detection we should be aware that a single outlier can smear affect the residuals of othersamples because of our regression parameters are obtained from all the data points . therefore , evena single outlier can cause other outliers to fall outside the confidence interval . therefore , we do notwant to hastily conclude that all residuals following outside the confidence interval outliers , only theone that has the maximum magnitude we actually take it out and then we redo this so , that one at atime we do it will be a safe way of performing outlier detection .again we willillustrate this with an example . here is a us bonds example which consists of samples , us bondswhose face value is dollars and it is a guaranteed interest rate is provided for each of thesebonds depending on when they were released and so on and there are different bonds with differentinterest rates . but , these are also traded in the market and their selling price in the market or bidprice would be different depending on the kind of interest rate they attract . so , you would presumethat the bond which has a higher interest rate would have a higher market price . so , there might be alinear correlation on linear relation between the market price and the interest rate for that bond . so ,here there are samples that are obtained from a thing . these datasets are standard data sets thatyou can actually download from the net . if you just search for it , you will get it just like the anscombedata set and what you called computer repair time data set that i have been using in the previouslectures . if you perform a regression and you will get a fit of this kind ok. so , it shows that a linear fitseems to be adequate you can run the r command lm and you will find that the intercept is . andthe slope is . and standard errors given and clearly the what you call the p value is very very lowwhich means that you will not reject the significance that is the intercept is significant and the slopeis also significant , they are not close to . you can of course , compute confidence interval and cometo the same judgment . you can run an f test . here also it says the p value of the f test is whichmeans you will reject the null hypothesis and conclude that a full model is adequate which meansthe slope is important here ok. so , the r value seems to be reasonably good . and so , we can saythe initial indicators are that a linear model is adequate . now , let us go ahead and do the residualanalysis for this .we perform a residual plot for standardized residual plot and wefind that except for these four points sample number , sample number , sample number ,seems to be outside of the plus confidence interval and they may be you may conclude that theseare outliers while the others are within the bound and they are definitely not out outliers . they seemto be some kind of a pattern as the coupon rate increases the standardized residuals increase . so ,maybe as there is a certain amount of non linearity in the model , but let us remove these outliersbefore making a final conclusion . so , we can remove all these four outliers at the same time if youwant . as i said that is not a good idea perhaps we should remove only sample number which hasfarthest away from the boundary with the residual with the largest magnitude and redo this becauseof lack of time i have just removed all four at the same time and then done the analysis . mysuggestion is you do one at a time and then repeat this exercise for yourself .here wehave removed these four samples , , and thing and run the regression analysis again . you cansee that the regression analysis maintain retaining all the samples is shown on the right hand sidethe plot the and their corresponding intercept coupon the slope as well as the f test statistic and soon r squared values shown here . and , once we remove these four samples which we outliers andthen rerun it now the fit trims to be much much better . it is also seen on the left hand side that thefit is much better . you can see that the r squared value has gone up to . from . the again thetest on the intercept and the coupon rate or slope shows that that they are significant and therefore ,you should not assume that they are close to . it also shows that the f statistic has also a low pvalue which means you take null hypothesis that a reduce model is adequate which means the linearmodel with the slope parameter is a much better fit . so , all of these indicators so seems to show thata linear model is adequate and the fit seems to be good , but we should do a residual plot again withthis data and if that actually shows no pattern we can actually stop there . we can say there are nooutliers and therefore , we can conclude that the regression model , that were fitted for this data is areasonably good one . next class we will see how to actually extend all of these ideas to the multiplelinear regression which consists of many independent variables and one dependent variable . thankyou .good morning everyone . in the previous lecture we saw how to fit a linear model betweentwo variables x which is the independent variable and y which is the dependent variable usingtechniques called regression and in this particular lecture , we are going to assess whether the modelwe have actually fitted is reasonably good or not . there are many methods for making thisassessment we will look at the some of these . so , what are the useful questions to ask when we fita model ? the first question to ask is whether the linear model that we have fitted is adequate or notis good or not ? if it is not good then perhaps we may have to go and fit a non linear model . so , thi sis the first step that we will actually test whether the model is good or not .theneven if you fit a model you may want to find out which coefficients of the linear model are relevant .for example , in the one variable case that we saw one independent variable the only two parametersthat we are fitting are the intercept term and the slope term . so , we want to know whetherwe should have fitted the intercept or not , whether we should have taken it as . when we haveseveral independent variables in multi linear regression we will see that it is also important to findout which variables are significant , whether we should use all the independent variables or whetherwe should discard some of them . so , this particular test for finding which coefficients of the linearmodel are significant is useful not only in the uni varied case , but more useful in multi linearregression where we want to identify important variables . suppose the linear model that we fit isacceptable , then we want to actually see whether we can improve the quality of the linear model .when fitting linear model using the method of least squares , we make several assumptions aboutthe errors that corrupt the dependent variable measurements . so , are these assumptions reallyvalid ? so , what are some of the assumptions that we make about the errors that corrupt themeasurements of the dependent variable ? we assume that the errors are normally distributed onlythis assumption can actually justify the choice of the method of least squares . we also assume thatthe errors in different samples have the same variance now this is called the homoscedasticityassumption . so , we are assuming that the errors in different samples are also having the samevariance . in general the these two statements assumptions about the errors that they are normallydistributed with identical variance can be compactly represented by saying that i the errorcorrupting measurement i is normally distributed with mean and sigma square variance . noticethat sigma squared is same and does not depend on i which means it is the same for all samples iequals to n that is the assumption we are made when we use the standard method of leastsquares . now , we also assume that all the measurements that we have made are reasonably goodand there are no bad data points or what we call outliers in the data . we saw that even when we areestimating a sample mean one bad data can result in a very bad estimate of the mean . so , similarlyin the method of least squares if we have one bad data point it can result in a very poor estimate ofthe coefficients . so , we want to remove such bad data from our data set and improve may be fit thelinear model only using the remaining measurements and that will improve the quality of the linearmodel . so , these are some of the things we need to actually verify . these assumptions what wehave made about the errors , whether they are reasonable or not if there are bad data can weremove them or not . and so , we will look at the first two questions in this lecture which is to assesswhether the linear model that we have fitted is good and how do we decide whether the coefficientsof the linear model are significant .so , before we start we need to derive someproperties of these estimates that we have derived . remember that the coefficients of the linearmodel that we have fitted which is the intercept term and the slope term these are obtainedfrom data from the sample of data that you have given . we have indicated that these are estimatesand not the true values by putting this karat term on top of each of these symbols which meansthat this is an estimate is an estimate of the true and is an estimate of the true which we donot know . however , we can prove based on the assumptions we have made regarding theerrors that the expected value of will be . what does it mean ? if we were to repeat theseexperiment collect another sample of n measurements and apply the method of least squareswe will get another estimate of . suppose we do this experiment several times and we will getseveral estimates of let me average all of them and the average value of that will tend towardsthe true value that is what this expression means , that if we were to repeat these experimentseveral times the average of the estimates that we derive will actually be a very good representationof the truth . similarly , we can show that the expected value of the true value notice thatand are unknown values . we are only saying that the expected value of hat will be the truevalue and the expected value of hat will be the true value and such statements are also known asif the estimates satisfies such properties , we also call these estimates are unbiased there is no bias inthe estimate of or . the second important property that we need to derive about theestimates is the variability of the estimates . notice , we get different estimates of hat dependingon the sample that we have derived . and therefore , we want to ask what is the spread of theseestimates of and if we were to repeat this experiment we can show again through based onthe assumptions we are made that the variance of hat will be sigma squared by sxx sxxrepresents the variance of x or x x summed over all the samples where as represents thevariance of the error that corrupts the dependent variable y. so , sigma squared is the error variance ,sxx is the variance of the independent variable . so , this ratio we can show will be the variance of .similarly , we can show that the variance of is which is the variance of the error , multiplied bythis ratio the numerator is the sum squared values of all the independent variables while thedenominator represents the variance of the independent variable . in this the sxx can be computedfrom data sigma , of xi can be computed from data . but we may or may not have knowledge aboutthe variance of the error which corrupts the dependent variable that depends on the instrumentthat was used to measure the dependent variable . if we have some knowledge of this instrumentaccuracy we can take the sigma squared from that but in most cases data analysis cases we may nothave been told what is the accuracy of the instrument used to measure the dependent variable . so ,sigma squared also have to somehow be estimated from the data we can show that we can derive avery good estimate of sigma squared by this quantity that is described here which is nothing but thedifference between the measured value yi and the estimated value yi hat which is obtained from thelinear equation we have fitted the linear model . so , for every xi we can predict from the linearmodel what is the estimate of y for every sample , then we can take the difference between themeasured and their predicted value of the dependent variable sum squared divided by n that is agood estimate of sigma hat squared which is the error in the dependent variable . now , why do wedivided by n instead of n n or n ? very simple y was estimated using the linear model it has twoparameters and which means the two of the data points have been used to estimate and. and therefore , only the remaining n samples are available for estimating this sigma square ok .suppose , you had only two samples then your numerator would be exactly because you have morethan two samples you have variability and that variability is caused by the error in the dependentvariable that is one of the reasons that you are dividing by n because two data points have beenused to estimate the parameters and . now , this particular numerator term is also called thesum squared errors or sse for short and sosse n . so , from the data after we have fitted themodel we can compute this value and compute this sse and obtain an estimate for sigma hat square .so , you do not need to be told the information about the accuracy of the instrument used tomeasure the dependent variable , you can get it from the data itself ok. so , now finally not only wehave got the first moment properties of as well as the , second moment properties which isvariance of and the variance of we can also derive the distribution of the parameter inparticular can be shown to be normally distributed . of course , with because the expected valueof is it is normally distributed with the true unknown value of as the mean and thevariance given by sigma if you substitute the sigma hat squared here , you can finally , show that thisis nothing , but i am sorry . so , this is the unknown divided by sxx ok sigma squared is essentiallyhere we have derived this by sxx is the variance of hat . now , if you do not know sigma squaredyou can replace the sigma squared with this sigma hat squared sse by n ok. so , once you havederived the distribution of the parameters we can perform hypothesis testing on the parameters todecide whether these are significantly different from and that is what we are going to do . we canalso derive what we call confidence intervals for these estimates based on their distributioncharacteristics that is the mean and the variance .now , the first thing we will do is todevelop confidence intervals confidence interval simply says what is the interval within which thetrue value unknown value is likely to be with percent confidence or percent confidence . youcan decide what size confidence interval size you need to have and correspondingly you can obtainthe interval from the distribution . so , if you want percent confidence interval also known as ciand its two sided because it could be either to the left of this estimated value or to the right of theestimated value . so , we are obtaining the percent confidence interval for from its distributionknowing its normally distributed with some unknown variance . so , that we can actually derive from. times , the from this particular range which is the estimated value of which is thestandard deviation of estimated from the data . notice , this is very similar to the normal thingwhich says that the true value will lie between estimate times the standard deviation . the reasonwhy we have . instead of is because we are no longer obtaining the critical value from thenormal distribution , but from the t distribution because is estimated from the data not knownapriori . so , the distribution slightly changes it is not the normal distribution , but the t distributionand that is what we have pointed out here this . is nothing but the critical value . percentcritical value upper critical value with degrees of freedom . why degrees of freedom ? becauseyou have in this particular example , we had points and we used two of the points for estimatingthe two parameters . so , n is the degrees of freedom which represents in general depending onthe number of data points this value . will change ok. so , that changes the degrees of freedom ofthe t distribution from which you should pick the upper and lower critical value . so , lower criticalvalue is . the upper critical value is . . percent . so , the overall is percent this confidenceinterval represents the percent confidence interval for . so , all we are going to state is that thetrue unknown lies within this interval with percent confidence that is what we are sayingok. can be estimated from data so you can construct this confidence interval . similarly , you canconstruct the percent confidence interval for from its variance . so , we are doing the samething . times standard deviation of estimated from data which is what we callremember which is nothing , but the square root of what we have derived inthe earlier thing with sigma squared replaced by the estimated quantity that is all this these twoterms represents . so , having constructed this percent confidence interval you can alsouse it for testing whether is the unknown or not or the unknown is or not which is whatwe will do .so , let us look at why would we want to actually do this hypothesis tests .we have fitted a linear model assuming that you know that the there is a linear dependencybetween x and y and we have obtained an estimate of . also we have also fitted an intercept termwe may want to ask is the intercept term significant maybe the line should pass through , theorigin . maybe the y variable does not depend on x in a significant manner which means isapproximately that unknown is exactly . although we have got some estimate for nonestimate for . so , the null hypothesis what we want to test is versus the alternative that. if it implies that the independent variable x has no effect on the dependent variable , buton the other if we reject this null hypothesis we are concluding that the independent variable doeshave some effect on the dependent variable ok. so , this particular hypothesis test can be also reinterpreted as the null hypothesis implies which means what we are doing is only a fit of yi aconstant , whereas if we accept the or reject the null hypothesis then we are actually fitting a linearmodel with and present ok. so , the null hypothesis represents the fit of a reduced modelwhich involves only the constant whereas , the rejection of the null hypothesis or the alternativehypothesis implies that we believe there is a linear model that relates y to x. so , between these twomodels we want to pick whether the reduced model is acceptable or maybe the full model is to beaccepted and the reduced model should be rejected that is what we are doing when we test thishypothesis versus . remember can be either positive or negative and that is why weare doing a two sided test . so , we can do it two ways we can actually reject the null hypothesis if theconfidence interval for include . so , notice that we have constructed the confidence interval for. so , this this term . may be negative and this maybe positive in which case this intervalinclude and then we have to definitely we might make a decision that that is insignificant andactually the true . on the other hand , if both these quantities if the interval is to the left ofwhich is completely negative or to the right of which means both these quantities are positivethen this interval will not contain and then we make the conclusion reject the null hypothesis thatequal which means is significant . so , from the confidence interval itself it is possible makethe reject or not reject the null hypothesis . so , we can extend this kind of analysis to even testwhether is or . so , if the confidence interval for this particular interval includes , then wesay that the intercept term is insignificant otherwise we will say that the intercept term should be issignificant and should be retained in the model ok. so , let us actually when we do a final examplewe we will see this . there are other ways of performing this test and we will continue the we will dothat also because that is very useful when we come to multi linear regression . in the uni variantregression we have only these two parameters but multi linear regression there are severalparameters we will have one corresponding to each independent variable and therefore , there willbe lot more hypothesis test you will do therefore , we will extend this kind of an argument to test foror using what is called a f test which we will go through .so , beforeperforming this f test to check whether a reduced model is adequate or we should accept a fullmodel we will use some definitions for some squared quantities . notice that let us say that we havethe set of data in this case , we have the example of the number of units that were repaired and thetime taken in minutes to repair the units by different sales person and we had such data pointssuch salesmen , who have actually reported the data . so , the red points actually represents the dataand the best the linear fit using the method of least squares using all the data points we gotsomething that is indicated by the blue line . now , suppose we believe that a constant model is goodthen we would actually fitted this particular horizontal line would be the best fit representing . thebest estimate of the constant model is the mean of y for all values of x our prediction bestprediction for yi is the mean value of yi which means x has no relevance is , so we will estimatethe best constant fit for yi is this mean value ok. so , the red line represents the best fit when weignore the slope the blue line represents the best fit of the data when we include the slopeparameter . now let us look at certain sum squared deviation the deviation between yi andwhich is the red line best fit of the constant this distance is yi a nd sum squared of all these verticaldistances from the point to the red horizontal line constant line that is what we call the ss total orsum squared total which also represents the variance of y yi all that we have not done isdivided by n. if we had divided by n or n we would have got the variance of y , but this representsthe sum squared errors in yi when we ignore the slope parameter that is another way of looking atit . the distance between y and y so now suppose we assume that the slope parameter is relevant ,then we would have fitted this blue line and for every xi let us take this xi yi corresponding to thisindependent variable , the predicted value of yi using this linear model would be the intersectionpoint of this vertical line with the blue line which is represented by the blue dot which is what we cally . and therefore , this vertical distance between the measured and the predicted value is the sumsquared errors is called sse y y . and this is the total error if we include the slope parameter inthe fit ok. so , the difference between these two quantities ss total ss error will be equal to what isalso called the sum squared residuals which is nothing , but the predicted value the mean valuesum squared over all the data points . now , we can show that sst will always be greater than ssebecause sse was obtained by fitting two parameters . therefore , you should be able to reduce theerror may be marginally , but you will be always able to be able to reduce the error . so , ss total is thewe will always be greater than sse and therefore , this difference ssr will also be positive all of theseare positive quantities . now , one can interpret ss total as the goodness of fit if we assume aconstant model we can interpret sse as the goodness of fit of the linear model . and therefore , wecan now use this to perform a test , literally intuitively we can say that if the reduction by includingthe slope parameter that is sst sse is significant then we conclude it is worthwhile including thisextra parameter otherwise not . this can be converted into hypothesis test formal hypothesis test andthat is what is called the f test .so , what we are doing is as i said that ss total is ameasure of how good the reduced model is which is reduced model here implies a constant modelwhereas , sse represents how good the linear model if we include the slope parameter . so , we areasking whether the reduced model should be accepted which is the null hypothesis or should berejected in favor of this alternative which is to include the slope parameter . so , as i said the f statisticfor doing this hypothesis test is to compute the difference in the goodness of fit for the reducedmodel which is always higher the goodness of fit sse for the alternative hypothesis . so , thisrepresents the sum squared errors for the reduced sort of model fit sse represents the goodness offit for the alternative hypothesis fit . this difference if it is large enough as i said , then we can actuallysay may be it is worthwhile going with the alternative hypothesis rather than the null hypothesis . so ,ssr which is the difference between this should be large enough . so , normalization what what thedenominator represents in some sense a percentage sse is the error obtained for the alternativehypothesis . remember because of the difference in the number of parameters used in the modelwe have to take that into account . the numerator sst has n degrees of freedom because we arefitting only one parameter . this has n degrees of freedom because we are fitting two parametersso the difference actually means its only one extra parameter . so , there is numerator which is ssrhas only degree of freedom which is n n whereas , the denominator sse has n degrees offreedom because it has two parameters which is fitted . so , we are dividing the sse by n thenumber of degrees of freedom . so , average sum squared errors per degree of freedom that is whatwe are saying and that is your normalization ssr divided by this normalizes the quantity . and we canshow formally that it is an f static because it is a ratio of two squared quantities and each squaredquantity is itself a chi squared variable because it is a square of a normal variable . therefore , this isthe ratio of chi squared and we have seen in the hypothesis testing the ratio of chi squaredvariable is an f distribution with appropriate degrees of freedom the numerator degrees of freedomis , the denominator degrees of freedom is n . so , if we want to now do a hypothesis test usingthis statistic f we compare f with the critical value from the f distribution . notice f is actually apositive quantity , so we do one sided test if we choose the level of significance as percent thenwe choose the upper critical value from the f distribution with and n degrees of freedom andpercent level of significance or what we call the upper critical values probability is percent . .so , once we get this from f distribution we got this threshold and if the statistic exceeds andthreshold , then we will reject the null hypothesis and say the full model is better than the reducedmode . we will accept the full mode or we say the we reject the reduced model in favor of the fullmodel that . the slope parameter is worth including in the model we will get a better fit that is howwe actually conclude . so , now there are several ways for deciding whether the linear model we havefitted is good or not . we could have used the r squared value we said that if it is close to plus onethen we should that is one indicator that the linear model may be good it is not sufficient what i callsufficient to conclude but it is good indicator . we can also do the test for significance of if weconclude that is not significant then maybe , then a linear model is not good enough we have tofind something else or we can do an f test and conclude whether the including the slope parameteris significant . so , these are various ways by which we can decide that the linear model is acceptableor not or the fit is good . we can not stop at this we have to do further tests , but at least these aregood initial indicators that we are on the right track .so , let us apply this to theexample of repair of or the servicing problem , where we have data points and the time taken andthe number of units repaired by different salesmen are given . so , in this case we have thesepoints which we have showed , we have fitted the data using r remember that lm is the functionwhich we should call for fitting a linear model and here we are predicting the dependent variable isminutes and the independent variable is units and once we have fitted this using the r function itgives out all of this output and it gives you the coefficient , the intercept term turns out to be .the slope parameter turns out to be . ok. but also it also tells you what is the standarddeviation estimated standard deviation of this parameter which is of the intercept . we also tells youwhat is the standard deviation of this estimate for which turns out to be . all of thiscalculated from the data using the formulas we have described . now , once it has given out we canactually now perhaps construct confidence intervals and find out whether these are significant or notor itself actually tells you something whether these if you run a hypothesis test whether you can wewill conclude whether is significant or is significant and that is indicated by what is called thisp value that it has reported . so , if you get a very high value t value is represents the statistic whichyou have again described earlier . so , it has computed the statistic for you for hat and the statisticfor testing whether or not and it has computed this statistic value and it has compared withthe critical value the distribution t distribution with the appropriate degrees of freedom andconcluded that the upper critical or the probabilities . which means if you get very high valuefor this anything greater than . or . it means you should reject the we should not reject thenull hypothesis . on the other hand , if you get a very low value it means you should reject the nullhypothesis with greater confidence you can reject the null hypothesis . so , in this case all its saying isif you choose a level of significance . you would not reject the null hypothesis , if you choose. you will not reject the null hypothesis , if you choose . as your level of significance , you willnot reject the null hypothesis . so , that is what the star indicates at what level of significance will youreject it . whereas , in the case of you will reject the null hypothesis which means you willconclude that is significant even if you choose very low significance value . , . , . oreven lower value . in fact , upto you will end up rejecting the null hypothesis . very low type oneerror probability if you choose also , you will reject the null hypothesis . so , therefore you canconcluding from these values that hat is insignificant which is is a reasonable hypothesis . letus go and means is a reasonable hypothesis , see whether this makes sense for this data .we know that if there no units are repaired then clearly no time should be taken by the sales repairperson which means because you have not taken any time for servicing because he has not repairedany units . so , this line technically should pass through , and that is what he has said , but however ,we went ahead merrily and fitted an intercept term but the test for hypothesis says you can safelyassume the intercept is it makes physical sense also and we could have only fitted that isgood enough for this data ok. so , perhaps you should redo this linear fit with and only usingand the you will get a slight different solution and you can test again . so , another way of decidingwhether the significant whether the slope parameter is significant or not is to look at the f statistic .notice the f statistic is very high and this p value is very low which means you will reject the nullhypothesis that the reduced model is adequate implying that you should use , including is verygood you will get a better fit using in your modeling . so , the high value of test statistic indicatesthat you reject the null hypothesis or a low value of p value for this f statistic indicates that youreject the null hypothesis even at a very low significance level .you can also constructthe confidence interval for and and from the earlier thing you say approximately it is estimate. times the standard error and that is what is seen . . times . and that turns out togive that gives the interval confidence interval . to . that means , with percentconfidence , we can claim that the true lies in this interval . similarly , we can construct the intervalconfidence interval for percent confidence interval and it turns out it is approximatelytwo times . which is and . . now , clearly the interval confidence interval for includes andtherefore , we should not reject the null hypothesis ok. we should simply accept thatperhaps , whereas the interval for confidence interval for does not include so , we can rejectthe null hypothesis that and the slope is an important parameter to retain in the model . now ,all this we have done only for single thing we will be extending it to the multi linear case and we willalso look at other assumptions the influence of bad data and so on in the following lectures . so , seeyou in the next lecture .welcome to this lecture on regression techniques . today we are goingto introduce to you the method of linear regression which is very popular technique for analyzingdata and building models . we will start with some motivating examples . what is it that regressiondoes ?it is used to build a functional relationship or what we call model between adependent variable or variables . there may be many of them and an independent variable . againthere might be more than one independent variable . we will define these variables and how youchoose them for the intended purpose little later , but essentially we are building a relationshipbetween two variables . you can take it in the simplest case and that relationship we also call it as amodel . so , in literature this is known as building a regression model . we can also call it asidentification of a model . sometimes this goes by the name of identification . most popular term isregression . so , let us take some examples , let us take a business case . so , suppose we are interestedin finding the effect of price on the sales volume . why do we want to actually find this effect ? wemay want to determine what kind of price we want to set the selling price of an item in order toeither boost sales or get a better market share . so , that is why we are interested in finding whateffect does price have on the sales . so , the purpose has to first define . what , why are we doing thisin the first place ? in this case our ultimate aim is to fix the selling price . so , as to increase our marketshare . that is the reason we are trying to find this relationship . so , similarly let us take anengineering example . in this case i am looking at a problem where i am trying to measure orestimate the properties of a product which can not be measured directly by means of an instrumenteasily . however by measuring other variables we are trying to kind of infer or estimate this difficultyto measure property case in point is the mechanical strength of a polymer . this is very difficult tomeasure on line continuously or the other hand process conditions such as temperature viscosity ofthe of the medium can be measured and from this it is possible to infer provided we have a modelthat relates the mechanical strength to these variables temperature viscosity and so on . first youdevelop a model , then you can use the model to predict mechanical strength given temperatureviscosity . so , such a model is also known in the literature as a soft sensor or the software sensor andthis model is very useful in practice to continuously infer values of variables which are difficult tomeasure using an instrument . indirectly , you are always inferring it through this model and othervariables . so , these are cases where we have the purpose is very clear . we are building the model fora given purpose and the purpose is defined depending on the area that you are working in .so , regression happens to be one of the most widely used statistical techniques with data andtypically there are two ah concepts here . the idea of a dependent variable which is known also in theliterature as a response variable or a regressand or a predicted variable or simply the outputvariable . the variable whose output we desire to predict based on the model . so , the symbolic wayof denoting this output variable is by the symbol y. on the other hand we have what is called theindependent variable . this is also known in the literature sometimes as the predictor variable the orthe regressor variable as opposed to predicted and regressand or it is also known as the exploratoryvariable or very simply as the input variable . we will use the term independent variable for this anddependent variables for the response variable . we will not use the other terms in this talk . so , theindependent variable is denoted by the symbol x typically . so , we have let us for the simple caseassume that we have only one variable which we denote by the variable x , the independent variableand we have another variable called the dependent variable which we wish to predict and we willdenote it as y .there are several different classifications and we are i was just goingto give you a brief idea of that we can have what is called the univariate regression problem or amultivariate regression problem . the univariate is the simplest regression problem you can come upcross which consists of only one dependent variable and one independent variable . on the otherhand if you talk about a multivariate regression problem , you have multiple independent variablesand multiple dependent variables . so , to understand the subject it is better to take the simplestproblem , understand it thoroughly and then you will see the extensions are fairly easy to follow . wecan also have what is called linear versus non linear regression . linear regression the relationshipthat we seek between the dependent and the independent variable is a linear function . whereas , ina non linear regression problem the functional relationship between the dependent andindependent variable can be arbitrary , can be quadratic , can be sinusoidal or can be any arbitrarynon linear function . and we will wish to discover that non linear function that best describes thisrelationship that forms part of non linear regression . we could also classify regression as simpleversus multiple . simple regression is the case of this single dependent and single dependindependent variable also called the siso system and multiple regression . linear regression is thecase when we have one dependent variable and many independent variables or what is called themiso case , multiple input single output . so , these are various ways of denoting the regressionproblem . we will always look at the simplest problem to start with which is the simple linearregression which consists of only one independent , one dependent variable and analyze itthoroughly .so , the first thing that the various questions that we want to first askwhere before we start the exercise is do we really think there is a relationship between thesevariables and if we believe there is a relationship , then we would not want to find out whether sucha relationship is linear or not . of course in linear regression we are going ahead with the assumptionthere exists a linear relationship , but you really want to know whether such a relation , linearrelationship exists and how strong is this , how strongly the independent variable affects the responseof the dependent variable . also we are interest since we are dealing with data that that has ranerrors or stochastic in nature and we only have a small sample that we can gather from there fromthe particular application . we want to ask this question what is the accuracy of our model in termsof how accurately we can estimate the relationship or the parameters in this model and if we use thismodel for prediction purposes subsequently how good it is ? so , these are some of the questions thatwe would like to answer even in the process of developing the regression model .so ,there are several methods also that are available in the literature for performing the regressiondepending on the kind of assumptions you make and the kind of problems that may you mayencounter . as i said the simple linear regression is the very very basic technique which we willdiscuss thoroughly . multiple linear regression is an extension of that for multiple independentvariables , but there are other kinds of problems you may encounter when you have several variables ,independent variables and those have to be tackled differently and there are techniques such asridge regression or principal component regression , lasso regression , partial least squares and soon and so forth which deals with these kind of difficulties that you might encounter in multi linearregression . of course , in non linear regression there is again a plethora of methods . i have only listeda just a few examples . you could have polynomial or spline regression where the type of equationsor functional relationship you specify a priori . you can have neural networks or today a supportvector regression . these are methods that are used to develop non linear models between thedependent and independent variable . now , let us take only the simple linear regression and gofurther .so , you have to understand that the regression process . it itself is not a oncethrough process it is iterative in nature . so , the first question that you should ask is the purpose .before we even start the regression , you ask what is the purpose what are you trying to develop themodel for like i said in the business case we are developing the model in order to determine set theprice selling price of a thing . so , you are really interested in how this selling price affects sales . thatis the purpose that you have actually got in the case of the engineering case . we said the purpose isto replace a difficult to measure variable by other easily measured variables and this model using acombination of the model and other easily measured variables . we are predicting a variable which isdifficult to measure online and then obviously we can monitor the process using that that parameter .so , the purpose for each thing has to be well defined , then that leads you to the selection ofvariables which is the output variable that you want to predict and what are the input variables thatyou think are going to affect the output variable . and so you choose the set of variables and takemeasurements , get a sample , do design of experiments which is not talked about in this whole whatwe called lecture . so , we will do proper design of experiments in to get the what we call meaningfuldata and once you have the data , we have to decide the type of model . when we say type of model ,it is a linear model or non linear model . so , let us say we have chosen one type of model , then youhave to actually choose the type of method that you are you are going to use in order to derive theparameters of the model or identify the model as we call it . once you have actually done thatunfortunately when we use a method , it comes with a bunch of assumptions associated . you wouldlike to validate or verify whether the assumptions we are made in deriving this model are correct orperhaps they are wrong what this is done by using what we call residual analysis or residual plots . so ,we will examine the residual plots to kind of judge whether the assumptions we have made indeveloping the model are acceptable or not . sometimes you might have also a few data ,experimental data . that data may be very bad , but you do not know this a priori you like to throwthem out . they might affect the quality of your model and therefore , you would like to get rid ofthese bad data points and only use those good experimental observations for building the model .how to identify such outliers or bad data is also part of the regression . you remove them and thenyou actually have to redo this exercise finally once develop the model . you want to actually dosensitivity analysis is there a if we have a small error in the data how well how much it affects theresponse variable and so on . so , this is sensitive analysis you do or if there are many variables youlike to ask this question are all variables equally important or should i discard one of the inputvariables and so on . so , these are the things that you would do and once you have belt built the bestmodel that you can from the given data and the set of variables you have chosen , then you proceedfurther . so , the data that you used in building this model or regression model is also called thetraining data . you have used the model to train you to use the data to train the model or estimatethe parameters of the model such that the data set is also denoted as the training data set . now ,once you have built the model , you would like to see how well does it generalize , can it predict theoutput variable or the dependent variable for other values of the independent variable which youhave not seen before . so , that comes to the testing phase of the model . so , you are evaluating thefitted model using data which is called test data . this test data is different from the training data .so , when you do experimental observations if you have a lot of data , you set apart a sum for trainingand remaining for testing typically or percent of the data experimental data is used for trainingor fitting the parameters and the remaining are used to test the model . this is typically done ifyou have a large number of data points . if you have fewer number of observations , then there areother techniques . we will actually explain or how to evaluate fitted models with small samples thatyou have . so , you first evaluate find out how well the model predicts on data that it has not seenbefore and once you have satisfied with it , then you can stop otherwise if this model that you havedeveloped even the best model that you have developed under whatever assumptions linear , linearmodel and so on and so forth that you have assumed it is not adequate for your purpose . you goahead and change the model type . you may want to actually now consider a non linear model maybeintroduce a quadratic term or you might want to more look at a more general form and redo thisentire thing , ok. it may also turn out that whatever you do you are not getting a good model , thenmaybe you should once look at the set of variables you have chosen and also the type ofexperiments that you have conducted . so , there could be problems with those that is probablyaffecting the model development phase . so when you all your atoms are failed , you may want toeven look at your experimental data that you have gathered . what , how did the , how did youconduct the experiments , whether there was any problem with that or the variables when youselected , did you miss out some important ones . so , there was quite a lot to regression . what weare going to describe only a small part , we are not giving you the entire story . we are only providinga short story on how to formulate or fit a model for a linear case . how to validate assumptions andhow to evaluate the fitted model , this is basically going to be the focus of the lectures .so , let us take one small example which we will use throughout . this is a data , fourteen observationssmall sample which we have taken on a servicing problem service agents . these service agents let ussay its like forbes aquaguard service agent that comes to your house , they go visit several housesand they take a certain amount of time to kind of service the unit or repair it if it is down . so , they wewill report the total amount of time taken in minutes let us say for through that they have spent onservicing different customers and the number of units that they have serviced in a given day . so , letus assume that every day the service agent goes out on his on his rounds and notes the total amountof time he has actually spent and tells at the end of the day reports to his boss the number of unitsthat he has repaired , he or she has repaired . let us say that there are several such agents roamingaround the city and so on and each of them come back and report let us say there are fourteen suchdata points that of the same person or multiple persons that you have actually gathered and fromthis the question that we want to actually answer let us say is given this data . suppose as an agentgives you data , you monitor him for week or month on how many how much time they spending andhow many units he is repairing every day and want to judge the performance of that agent , serviceagent in order to reward or appropriately kind of you know improves productivity . so , if you know arelationship between the time taken and number of units repaired which you believe should happen .if somebody takes more time and he is doing nothing not repairing much , then there is someinefficiency in the in the maybe is wasting too much time in between travel or whatever . so , we needto find out right . so , the purpose is to actually judge the service agent performance and doperformance incentives in order to improve productivity of these agents . so , we are interested indeveloping a relationship between number of units and the time taken by thing or vice versa . now ,for the sake of argument right now i have plotted as we said in the two variable cases you canvisually plot the data scatter plot . so , you plot the data . first i have taken units on the x axis and theminutes on the y axis . i will discuss shortly whether we should choose units as the independentvariable or minutes as the dependent variable or vice versa . but for the time being i have justplotted it on the x and y axis and look at the spread of data and it looks like there is a linearrelationship between the two variables , ok. now , we want to build this linear relationship becausefrom the trend of the data we believe a relationship exists . let us go ahead with an assumption andjust try to build this linear model ok .now , comes the exact mathematical form inwhich we state this problem . we have data points xi of the independent variable , we have n datapoints in the example n is and y is the dependent variable which we want to use for prediction orwhatever purpose that we want for this model . in this case as i said given both x and y , i would liketo rate if some service agent comes and tells this is the time i spent and this is a number of units ihave ai have repaired and based on its performance for a month or a week you would like to rate theservice agent . that is the purpose for building this model . so , what we do is we have these fourteenobservations we have taken and we are going to set up the model form . so , as i said we are decidedto go with a linear model and the linear model in general can be written like this between y and x ,and this is said that every data point whatever be y whether it is time or units in the previous casewhich you have taken as the dependent variable can be written in terms of the independent variableas a constant called the intercept term plus xi where represents what we call the slope . so ,tells you how change in xi effects the response variable y , ok. so , is a constant . it is an offsetterm , but given xi the independent variable it is not possible to get whatever observations we have .observations always contain some error and that error is denoted by i. so , i represents an error .now , we have to ask this question . what is this error due to ? there could be several reasons for thiserror . this could be because we have not measured xi precisely or yi precisely or it could be that themodel form we have chosen is perhaps inadequate to explain the relationship between xi and yi andtherefore , whatever we are unable to explain is denoted as i and it is called a modeling error . so , inthis particular ordinary least squares regression that we are going to deal with , we will assumewhenever we set up the problem xi the independent variable is assumed to be completely error freein the sense we have measured xi exactly . there is no error in reporting of xi . on the other hand thedependent variable yi could contain error . we allow for errors in the reporting of yi , but the error isnot what we call a systematic error . it is a random error that is how we are modeling i or you couldalso look at i as a modeling error . in this particular case where you can say this linear model is onlyan approximation of the truth and anything that we are not able to explain perhaps can be treatedlike a random error modeling error . whatever be the reason the most important thing to note is thatthis particular model form or for ordinary least squares methodology , a formulation does not allowerror in the independent variable . so , when you choose the independent variable one of the thingsyou should do carefully is that you should ensure that this thing is the most accurate among the twovariables . if you have a two variable case , you should choose the independent variable as the onewhich is the most accurate one . in fact , it should be probably error free . so , let us take the case ofthe units and minutes ok. typically the number of units repaired by a service agent will be reportedexactly because he will have a receipt from each customer and saying that the unit was serviced , yougive this back and the total number of receipts that the service agent has gathered preciselyrepresents the number of units serviced . so , there can not be an error unless somebody transcribesthis thing the error in transcription . this can be exactly counted and you would have a precise idea . itis an integral number . they can not be an error in this . on the other hand the amount of time takencould vary because of several reasons . one because this guy reported the total time he actuallystarted out on the day and when he returned to the office end of the day and this could involve notjust the service time , but also travel time and depending on the location the travel time could vary , itcould vary from time of day depending on the traffic , it could also vary because of congestion or aparticular event that has happened . so , the time that has been reported contains other factors thatwe may not have precisely considered unless the service agent goes with that stopwatch andmeasures exactly the time for repair . typically you will report the total time spent in servicing all ofthese units including travel time and so on . that is the kind of data that you might get . so , you shouldregard the minutes as only an approximation . you can not say that is only due to servicing , but alsocould have other factors which you treat as random disturbance or random error . so , it is better inthis case to choose units as the x variable because that is precise , that has no error and y minutes asthe dependent variable notice . there might be an argument saying that you know you should alwayschoose the variable which you wish to predict as the dependent variable need not once you build amodel , you can always decide to use this model for predicting x given y or y given x. so , it does notmatter how you cast this equation , how you build this model , it is more important that when youapply ordinary least squares you should actually ensure that the independent variable is anextremely accurate measurement or it represents the truth as closely as possible whereas , y couldcontain other factors or errors and so on and it is this method is tolerant to it . so , this goes if on theother hand if you believe both x and y contain significant error , then perhaps you should considerother methods called total least squares or principal component regression that we will talk aboutlater ok. if not in this lecture , but if we have the time we will do it later . so , essentially what i amsaying is that once you have decided based on purpose based on the kind of quality of the of themeasurements what is the independent dependent variable , then you can go ahead and say given allthe observations n observations what is the best estimate of and as i read that is theintercept parameter and is the slope to actually geometrically interpret . represents thevalue of y when x is . so , when you put x and you look at where this line intercepts the y axis , thisvertical distance is and the slope which represents the slope of this regression line that is . so ,you are estimating the intercept and slope . so , now what is the methodology for estimating this ,ok ? and . so , what we will do is we will do a kind of a thought experiment . you give values ofand and then you can draw this line . so , we will ask different people let us say values of andand draw appropriate lines . the line shape that the slope and the intercept will be differentdepending on what value you proposed for and , then once you have done this you will actuallygo back and find out how much deviation is there between the observed value and the line ok. inthis particular case , we will say the observed value let us take this observed value is yi correspondingto this xi which is . now , the line if this particular equation is correct , then this is the predicted valueof y which means for this given value of xi according to this equation you believe y predicted shouldbe here and then this deviation between the observed value and the predicted value which is on thisline . the vertical distance is what we call the estimated error , ok. so , you do not know what theactual error is , but if you propose values for immediately i am able to derive an estimate forthis error which is the vertical distance of the point from that line , we estimate this error for all datapoints , ok. so , we compute e for every data point yi using the proposed parameters and thevalue of the independent variables we have for all the observations . now , what we do is we can sayas a metric what is the best line we propose that the best line is one which minimizes the deviationssum squared deviations or the distances . so , overall the data points we will compute this distancewhich is geometric distance is nothing , but square of this value we will compute this and sum over allthe data points n data points and we try to find and which minimizes this sum squared value orminimizes the sum of the vertical distances or the point from that line . so , the notion of a best fitline in the least square sense or the ordinary least square sense is one that minimizes the verticaldistance of the points from the proposed line . now , you can once you set up this formulation , thenwe can say then whoever gives the best and will have the minimum vertical distance of thepoints from that line and this can be done now analytically . instead of asking you now for this and, i try to solve this optimization problem which means minimize this , find out whichminimizes this and this what is called the unconstrained optimization problem with two parameters .you differentiate this with respect to , set it equal to for those called the first order conditions .those of you have done a little bit of optimization will know that or calculus will know all i have to dois differentiate this function with respect to , set it equal to , differentiate this function withrespect to , set it equal to and solve the resulting set of equations . and finally , i will get thesolution for and which minimizes this sum square error . so , the least squares technique usesthis as a criterion in order to derive the best values of and . of course we can counter by sayingi will use some other metric , maybe i should have used absolute value that will make the problemdifficult . this method was proposed in the late s by gauss , our and another person calledlegendre and they it has become popular as a methodology although in recent years other methodshave taken over . so , the method of least squares is a very popular technique and it gives youparameters analytically for the simplest cases . so , you get estimated . so , the estimate that youderive is not it is not that you should you should treat this estimate as actually the truth , it is anestimate from data . had you given me a different sample maybe i would have got a differentestimate . remember that the estimate is always a function of the sample that you had given me . so ,we denote such estimates by this hat always implies . it is an estimated quantity and the estimatedvalue of turns out to be the cross covariance between x and y divided by the variance of x. youcan prove this . so , remember you this cross covariance is essentially like a pearson s coefficient . so ,the pearson s coefficient said if the coefficient pearson s correlation coefficient was close to or ,you said that there is a you could interpret that there may exist a linear relationship . similarly youcan see is function of that coefficient it depends on the cross covariance between x and y andthe intercept turns out to be nothing , but the mean of y the estimated value of slope parametermultiplied by the mean of x. this is your intercept parameter . of course one could also ask suppose iknow that if x is , y is . i know that apriori in this particular case for example if you do not serviceany units which means you have not travelled you are not let us say you are on holiday , then clearlyyou would have taken zero time for servicing . so , i know in this particular case perhaps that that ifyou process zero units , you should not have taken any time . and so , therefore the intercept shouldpass through . if you know it and you want you want to force this line to pass through theorigin , then you should not estimate . you should simply remove this parameter and simply writey x and in which case the solution for will turn out to be again sxy by sxx . except that this sxyis a cross covariance not about the mean , but about which means you set equals in thisexpression and you will get sigma x y in the numerator over all data points divided by sigma xi .so , essentially you are taking the variance around and the cross covariance around , and thenyou will get the estimated value of . of course , in that case is assumed to be . so , the line willpass through , and you will get another slope you are forcing the line to pass through , .remember you have to be careful when you do this because it will unless you are sure that shouldpass through the origin , you should not force this thing . you will get a bad fit , ok. if you know it andyou want demand it makes physical sense , then you are well within your rights to ah force equalto . do not estimate it that can be done by simply taking the cross covariance and variance aroundinstead of around their respective means .. so , this is as far as getting the solution isconcerned . so , now once you get the solution you can ask for every given xi what is thecorresponding predicted value of yi using the model . so , you plug in your value of xi in the estimatedmodel which is using the estimated parameter and and i will call this prediction y , it is alsoan estimated quantity . for any given x i , i can estimate the corresponding yi using the model andgeometrically if you actually try to estimate yi given this point , it will fall on this line ok. you draw thevertical line which intersects this particular regression line and that particular point on that line willrepresent y for every point . so , for this point it is actually the corresponding predicted value will lieon this line here . if this is the best fit line is the blue line represents the best fit line in the leastsquare sense . so , you can do this for any new point which you have not seen before in the test set .also let us look at some couple of other measures which you can derive from this . we can talkabout what is called the coefficient of determination r squared which is defined in this manner ,. so , essentially this particular quantity called r squared will bebetween and we can show , ok. so , how to interpret this ? the denominator is the variability in yi .what do you mean by that ? that is if you have given just yi and try to find out how much variancethere it is there in the data , this particular thing divided by n of course gives you the variance of y. so ,you can say this much variability exists in the data . suppose i build the model and try to predict yi . ifxi had a influence on y , then i should be able to reduce its variability , i should be able to do a betterprediction and the difference between yi and y should be lower if xi had a strong influence indetermining y , ok. so , the numerator represents the variability which is explained by the explanatoryvariable xi or the independent variable xi , ok. so , if the numerator is approximately equal to thedenominator , then you basically get and r squared will be close to . the implication of this is xihas a very little impact on explaining y and probably there is no relationship between y and x. on theother hand if the numerator is close to and then you get r square close to , it implies that the xican explain the variation in yi which means there is a strong relationship between xi and yi . so ,values close to indicates a poor fit , values close to indicates a good fit , but the problem does notend there if you get r squared close to , you should not conclude your job is done and the linearrelationship is good and so on and the anscombe data for example , when we saw last year last classif you try to find the anscombe data for the four datasets , you will get all r squared close to andthat does not mean that the linear model is good . you should look at other measures before youconclude conclusively determine that a linear model is good . value close to is a good startingpoint . yes you can now be a little bit assurance you get that the linear model perhaps can explainrelationship between yi and xi ok. there is also something called the adjusted r square which we willcome across which is essentially this . if you look at the denominator , you can say that if you try toestimate a constant value suppose you say xi has no influence and drop that i , i and try to estimatein the least square sense , you will find that the best value of is actually best estimate is just .so , you can regard the denominator as fitting a model with just the parameter . on the otherhand the numerator you have used two parameters to fit the model . whenever you use moreparameters typically you should get a better fit . so , generally the numerator value is obtainedbecause you have used two parameters whereas , the denominator you used only one parameter . so ,you have to account for the fact that you have used more parameters to obtain a better fit and notbecause there is a linear relationship between yi and xi . so , you should go back and account for thiswhat we call the number of parameters you have used and or the number of degrees of freedomthat is used in estimating the numerator . for example , you have n data points and in this case thep parameters . so , n i am sorry p equals which happens to be only . so , n would representthe number of degrees of freedom used to in estimate this numerator variability whereas , n isused to estimate the denominator variability because you have used only the parameter fordenominator whereas , you used parameters to estimate the numerator . so , you should adjust thisby dividing the number of degrees of freedom and the adjusted r squared essentially is makes thisadjustment and give the it is different from r squared , but it is a more accurate way of what we calljudging whether there is a good linear good model between the dependent and the independentvariable . and in this case p equals because i have only one explanatory variable , but this it canextend into a many independent variable case where p is the number of independent variables youhave chosen for fitting the model .ok finally we will end with the r command . the rcommand for fitting a linear model is just called lm if you have loaded the data set and then you saythat what kind of , what you call ah variable is the independent variable and what is the dependentvariable you indicate . in this case we have indicated minutes has the independent variable and unitshas the dependent variable and these are variables that forms part of the data set . they are definedthe as these variables and therefore , you are using them . so , loading of the data set you would havealready seen , lm is the one that you used to build the model , you indicate what is the dependent andthe independent variable and then you will get an output that is given here . first you will get therange of residuals which i said is the estimated value of i for all the data points . in this case all thefourteen residuals are not given the max value min value . the first quartile , third quartile in themedian are given here and i will only now look at two parameters the which is the first . theintercept is called the . estimated value is here and slope parameter the estimated value is . forthis particular data set . now , i will also now only focus on this particular line which talks about the rsquared value which we explain the to judge the quality of the model . it is a very high r squared youget or the adjusted r squared . so , from this we can conclude may be a linear model s explains theirrelationship between x and y very precisely , but we are not done yet . we have to do residualanalysis , we have to do further ah what you call plots in order to judge and conclude that a linearmodel is adequate . we will do this and the other things that outputs that are given as in thesubsequent lectures i will explain them and we will see you in the next lecture.s thank you .welcome to the lectures in data analytics , in this series of lectures i am going to introduce to youmodel building . in particular i will be talking about building linear models using a techniques calledregression techniques . so , let us start with some basic concepts , we are going to introduce thenotion of correlation .different types of correlation coefficients that have beendefined in the literature , what they are useful for . this is a preliminary check you can do , before youstart building models . then i will talk about regression , specifically linear regression and i willintroduce the basic notions of regression and then take the case of two variables before taking goingthrough multi linear regression where there are several input variables and one dependent outputvariable . finally after building the model , we would like to assess how well the model performs , howto validate some of the assumptions we have made and so on . so , this is called model assessmentand validation . so , let us first look at some measures of correlation , we have already seen one in thebasic introductory lectures to statistics .so , let us consider n observations ofvariables x and y. so , denoted by the samples xi , yi and we can of course compute the sample means ,we have seen this in statistics , which is just the summation of all values divided by n for x which isdenoted by . and similarly we can do the sample mean of y , which is denoted by . we can alsodefine sample variances which is nothing , but the sum square deviation of the individual values fromthe respective means , xi whole square summed over all the values divided by n or n as the casemay be . so , we define these sample variances sxx and syy corresponding to the variance of samplevariance of x and y. we can also define the cross covariance which is denoted by sxy which isnothing , but the deviation of xi from . and the corresponding deviation of yi from . and theproduct of this we take and sum over all values and divide by n. notice again that this xi and yi orderpairs in the sense that , corresponding to the experimental condition i th experiment we haveobtained values for x and y and that is what we have to think we can not shuffle these values anywhich way , they have known assumed to be corresponding to some experimental conditions that youhave set . so , there are n experimental observations you have made .now let usdefine what we call correlation , correlation is nothing but the indicates the strength of associationbetween the two variables of course , if you find a strong correlation it does not mean that the onevariable is a cause and the other is an effect . you can not treat correlation as a causation , becausethere can be a third variable which is basically triggering these two and therefore , you can only findthe correlation but can not assume that one of the variables is a cause and the other is an effect . wecan also before we actually do numerical computation , we can check whether there is an associationbetween variables by using what is called the scatter plot . we have done this before , so we can plotthe values of xi on the x axis , yi on the y axis and for each of these points and we can see whetherthese points are oriented in any particular direction . for example , the figure on the left here ,indicates that the yi increases as xi increases there seems to be a trend in this in particular we cansay there is even a linear trend as xi increases yi correspondingly increases in the linear fashion . thisis a positive trend , because when xi increases yi increases . in the next figure , the middle figure weshow a case where xi is as xi increases yi seems to decrease and again there seems to be a patternassociation between xi and yi and this is a negative trend . whereas , if you look at the third figure , thedata that we find seems to be having no bearing on each other that is yi values do not seem todepend in any particular manner on the xi values , when xi increases maybe yi increases forsometimes some cases and yi decreases , that is why it is spread in all over the place . so , we can saythere is little or no correlation . this is a qualitative way of looking at it we can quantify this andthere are several measures that have been proposed depending on the type of variable and the kindof association you are looking for .so , let us look at the most common type ofcorrelation , which is called the pearson s correlation . here as we started with , we have nobservations for the variables x and y and we define the pearson s correlation coefficient denoted byrxy or sometimes denoted by rhoxy . by this quantity defined , where we are essentially taking samething that we did before the covariance between x and y , divided by the standard deviation of x andthe standard deviation of y. the numerator represents the covariance between x and y can also becomputed in this manner we can expand that definition we have for the covariance and we can findthat it is nothing but the product of xi yi n times the mean of x and the mean of y , which representsthe covariance of x and y. and the denominator represents the standard deviation we can look atthis division by the denominator as what is called normalization . so , this value is now bounded , wecan show that rxy will take any value between and , if it takes a value we say that the twovariables are negatively correlated if rxy it takes a value close to , we say they are positivelycorrelated . on the other hand if rxy happens to value close to , it indicates that x and y have nocorrelation between them . now what how we can use this , let us see .so , thiscorrelation pearson s correlation actually is useful to indicate there is a linear dependency between xand y for example , if y is a linear function of x , then we the correlation coefficient of correlationcoefficient or the pearson s correlation coefficient will turn out to be either close to or close to ,depending on whether y is increasing with x , then we say it is a positive correlation , as we saw in afigure . if y is decreasing with x linearly , then we say it is a the correlation coefficient will be close to . on the other hand if the correlation coefficient is close to , all we can conclude from them isperhaps there is no linear relationship between y and x but perhaps there is non linear association .so , we will come to that a little later . the way it is defined we can also not apply it to ordinalvariables which means ranked variables . so , suppose you have a variable where you have indicatedyour scale , on a scale of say to ok the let us say the course , the those kind of variables arety cally you do not apply a pearson s correlation , there are other kinds of correlation coefficientsdefined for what we call ranked or ordered variable , ordinal variables . ty cally in order to get a goodestimate of the correlation coefficient between y and x you need at least points that isgenerally recommended . and then like your sample mean or the sample variance , standarddeviation if there are outliers , if there is one bad data point or experimentally you know ,experimental point which is wrongly recorded for example , that can lead to misleading values of thiscorrelation coefficient . so , it is not robust with respect to outliers , just like the sample mean andsample variance we saw earlier .so , let us look at some examples , this is a veryfamous data set called the anscombe s data set . here there are data points , for each of this thereare data sets i have only shown of them . each of them contains exactly data pointscorresponding to xi and y i , these points have been carefully selected . in the first one if you look at it ,if you plot the scatter plot , you will see that there seems to be a linear relationship between y and xin the first data . in the second data if you look at this figure , you can conclude that there is a nonlinear relationship between x and y. and the third one you can say well , there is a perfect linearrelationship for all the data points except one which seems to be an outlier , which is indicated we faraway from that line . so , if i apply pearson s , compute pearson s correlation coefficient for each ofthese data sets , we find that it is identical it does not matter whether the you actually apply the firstdata set , or second data set , the third data set . in fact , the fourth data set there is no relationshipbetween x and y and it turns out to be they have the same correlation coefficient . so , what itseems to indicate , is that if we apply the pearson s correlation and we find a high correlationcoefficient close to in this case it does not immediately you can not conclude there is a linearrelationship . for example , this is a non linear relationship and still gives rise to a high value . so , it isnot confirmatory in the sense there is a linear , we can say it is one way if there is a linearrelationship between x and y , then the correlation pearson s correlation coefficient will be high ,when i say high it can be or . but if there is a non linear relationship between x and y , it may behigh or it may be low we will see some data sets to actually show this , illustrate this point .here are three examples , in the first example i have taken equally spaced values between andfor x and i have actually computed y as cos x . so , there is a relationship between y and x , in thiscase it is a sinusoidal relationship . so , if we apply the pearson s correlation coefficient , compute thepearson correlation coefficient for this data set we get a very low value close to , indicating as ifthere is no association between x and y. but clearly there is a relationship because it is non linear infact , it is symmetric , the points above the line , when it is excess between and by and when itis between by and and between and by , by and they all seem to cancel eachother out . and finally , give you a correlation coefficient which is very small does not indicate implythat there is no relationship between y , all you can conclude from this , is perhaps there is no linearrelationship between x and y. similarly let us look at another case , where this non linear y xwhere i have chosen x between and with equally spaced point of . each points you getand i compute a y equals x square and then computer pearson s correlation for this xy data , you findit is a ve ry high correlation coefficient . you can not immediately conclude there is a linearrelationship between x and y ok , you can only say there is a relationship perhaps it is linear , maybe itis even long linear we have to explore further . it is close to , i would have said there is no linearrelationship ok but it is in this case it is very high . so there is some association , but perhaps theassociation you can not definitely conclude it is linear , it may be non linear . on the other hand if thedata , if i chosen my x data between and symmetrically ok for between and , y x willhave positive values between and y equals x square will have positive values again , although xis positive , y is positive in this range and between negative values for x , y is still positive . so , thesewill cancel each other out exactly and will turn out that the correlation coefficient in this case is ,although there is a non linear relationship between y and x. so , all we are saying is this , if thereexists a linear relationship between y and x then the pearson s correlation coefficient will be eitherclose to or , perfect relationship , linear relationship . on the other hand if it is close to , youcan not dismiss a relationship between y and x. similarly if value is high , looking at this just the valuewe can not conclude that there definitely exists a linear relationship between y and x , you can onlysay there exists a relationship between y and x. so , let us actually look at other correlationcoefficients , you should note that pearson s correlation coefficient can be applied only to what wecalled not ranked variables , ordinal variables , real valued variables like we have here .so , let us look at other correlation coefficients that can be applied even to ordinal variables . now ,here is a case , where we only look at the again look for degree of association between two variablesbut this time the relationship may be either linear or non linear , if x increases y increases ordecreases monotonically , then the spearman s rank correlation will tend to be very high . so , here isa case when x increases y increases , this also is a case when x increases y increases monotonicallybut in this case the right hand figure is a non linear relationship , the left hand figure is indicates alinear relationship . let us apply define spearman s rank correlation , apply it to the same data set andsee what happens .so , in the spearman s rank correlation what we do is convert thedata , even if it is real value data to what we call ranks . so , for example , let us say i have datapoints , in this case xi is like somebody has taken a scale between let us say and , and andsimilarly y is also a value between and . so , what we have done is looked at all the individualvalues of x and assign the rank to it . for example , the lowest value , in this case x value is and it isgiven a rank , the next highest x value is that is given a rank and so on and so forth . so , we haveranked all of these points notice that the th and the st value both are tied . so , they get the rankand which is the midway the half of it . so , we have given it a rank of . , because there is a tie .similarly if there are more than two values which are tied , we take all these ranks and average themby the number of data points which have equal values and correspondingly we obtain the rank . wealso rank the corresponding y values . for example in this case the th value as a rank and so on soforth , th value as a rank and so on so we are given a rank in the similar manner . now once youhave got the rank , you compute the difference in the ranks . so , in this case the difference in the rankfor the first data point is and we square it similarly we take the difference in the second data pointin the ranks between xi and yi which is and square it and we will get . so , like this we take thedifference in the ranks square it and we get the final , what we call the d squared values , we sum overall values and then we compute this coefficient . it turns out , that this coefficient also will be liebetween and and indicating a negative association , and indicating a positive associationbetween the variables . and in this particular case the rank , the spearman rank correlation turns outto be . .let us look at some of the things , as i said means no association whenthere is the positive association between y and x , then the rs value a spearman s thing will be likethe pearson s correlation . and similarly when y decreases with x then we say that you know thespearman s rank correlation is likely to be close to and so on . the differences between pearson sand spearman is not only can it be applied to ordinal variables even if there is a non linearrelationship between y and x , the spearman rank correlation can be high ok , it is not likely to be , itwill have a reasonably high value . so , that can be used to distinguish maybe , to look for the kind ofrelationship between y and x .so , let us apply it to the anscombe s data set . in thiscase also we find that the , for the first one the spearman rank correlation is quite high , in the secondone also reasonably high . in fact , the pearson also was high notice that the pearson was same for allthis and the third one also is fairly high , . . so , all of these things it is indicating that there is areally strong association between x and y .suppose we had applied i would suggestthat you apply it to the cos x example and y squared x y squared example you will find that thespearman rank correlation for these will be reasonably high . it may not be close to , but will behigh indicating there is some kind of a non linear relationship between them , even though pearson scorrelation might be low . so , a third type of correlation coefficient that is used for ordinal variables iscalled the kendall s rank correlation and this correlation coefficient also measures the associationbetween ordinal variables . in this case , what we define is a concordant and a discordant pair . if youlook at the values compare two observations let us say x y and sorry here , it should be x y andx y . if x is greater than x and the corresponding y is greater than y , then we say it is aconcordant pair that means , if x increases and y also correspondingly increases then these two datapoints are known said to be concordant . similarly if x is increasing and x less than x , andcorrespondingly y , y is less than y then also we say it is a concordant pair that means , when xincreases y increases or x decreases or y decreases then we say these two data pairs are concordant .on the other hand if there is an opposite kind of relationship . so , if you take two data points x yand x y and we say that you know look , we look at the data points and find that if x is greaterthan x but the corresponding y is less than y or if x is less than x , but y is greater than y ,then we say it is a discordant pair . so , we take every pair of observations in your sample and thenassign whether there is a concordant or discordant pair .let us take an example and look at it . so ,once we have the number of concordant pairs and number of discordant pairs , we take thedifference between then divide by the n into n by and that is called the kendall stop .we can take a item here , there are about seven observations let us say seven different wines or teaor coffee and there are two experts who rank the taste of the tea or coffee or wine on a scalebetween to . for the first , the expert number gives it a rank of and expert also ranks it forthe second the expert ranks it while the expert ranks it is in a scale or gives it the value ofand so on so forth for the seven different types of thing . now you compare data point and datapoint , in this case experts o nion is that is let us say better than expert also says is betterthan . so , it is a concordant pair . so , and are concordant that is what is indicated here . similarlyif i look at the data point and , expert says it is better , is better than expert also says isbetter than . so , it is a concordant pair . similarly if you look at and both are agree in agreement ,is better than , is better than . so , it is a concordant . let us look at the th and the st one ,looks like expert says it is better , expert also says better , concordant . but the nd and th if youcompare , expert says it is better th one is better than the nd but expert disagrees , he says theth thing is worse than the nd one . so , there is a discordant pair of data and that is indicated by d .so , and are discordant , and are discordant . similarly here it says and are concordant ,are concordant and so on so forth . so , between every pair n into n by pairs , you will get and wehave classified all of these pairs as either concordant or discordant . and we find there arediscordant pairs and concordant pairs and we can compute the kendall s tau coefficient ok. thisbasically says , if this is high then there is broad agreement between the two experts , right . so ,basically we are saying y and x are associated with each other or there is a strong associationotherwise it is not strongly associated or completely , if the expert completely disagrees with expertyou might get even negative values ok. so , the high negative value or high positive value indicatesthat the two variables x and y in this case are associated with each other . again this can be used forordinal variables , because it can worked with ranked values here , as we have seen in this .so , again if we apply it to kendall s rank to this anscombe s dataset , we find that although it hasdecreased for this linear case the value has decreased as compared to the pearson and spearman scorrelation coefficient it still has a reasonably high value . high in this case ty cally you should , inexperimental data you can not expect to get a value i mean beyond . . , you should consideryourself fortunate ty cally because we rarely know the nature of the relationship between variables ,we are only trying to model them . so , in this case non linear relationship , you find again areasonably high correlation coefficient for kendall s rank and the last one again it is linear , perfectlylinear , so you are getting very high association between them . so , really speaking you can actuallyuse these to get a preliminary idea before you even build the model of course , for two variables it iseasy , you can plot it , you can compute these correlation coefficient and try to get a preliminaryassessment regarding the type of association that is likely to be and then try go ahead and choosethe type of models you want to bid . and this is the first thing that we do before we jump into linearregression . so , see you next class about how to build the linear regression model . thank you .lecture case study on regression part iiiso , now we have seen how tocompute correlation . so , let us go ahead with model building .so , we are going to be looking intotwo algorithms one is linear regression and other is the random forest regression and for each ofthese algorithms we are going to use two sets of data . now , the first data is obtained by removingany missing value . so , any row with any number of missing value gets omitted . so , even if it is a singlerow with one missing value the entire row gets omitted . now , the other data is where i impute themissing values . so , i am not going to let go of the missing cells . i am going to come up with somealgorithm that is going to help me impute the missing value . so , these are the two sets of data andfor each of these set we are going to use a linear regression model and a random forest model . so ,let us start with the first theta which is by omitting missing rows right . so , the command that you aregoing to use to drop any data with a missing value is dropna . i am setting the axis as equal to .because i want to drop any row that contains any number of missing value be it or be it all cellsmissing right . and once the command is executed so , the remaining data gets saved on to cars omit .we started with records and after removing all rows which were missing it came down toand that is roughly about records that is been removed . so , once it is omitted cars omitand you can see that around records have been removed .so , we havecolumns that are categorical in nature for instance vehicle type , gearbox or model . now , the valuesunder these columns are strings in nature and none of the machine learning algorithms under scikitlearn except columns which are strings by nature . so , i am going to dummy encode these categoricalcolumns and i am going to generate newer columns out of it .for instance , let us sayif your fueltype is diesel , petrol and you have cng and lpg you have four categories here , then i amgoing to generate which is more columns out of this one column will have fueltype diesel , theother column will be fueltype petrol and similarly , you have columns generated on it . now , the valueunder each of these column will be or now , if it is not present and if the value is present . forinstance , let us take the column fueltype . now , this column has several values . let us say you have acolumn called fueltype diesel and if diesel is present under this then that column will be then thatcell will be marked as , otherwise it will be marked as . so , ideally we are trying to encode all ofthese categories as s or s alone and we are going to get rid of the strings . so , in order for us to dothat i am going to use the get dummies function from the panda s library and i am going to drop thefirst category . so , if i run it , you will see there are columns in total . so , we started with andthen we have more . and , the reason is because you have several categories under each columnand especially variables like brand and model have several categories under them and hence you aregetting more number of columns .so , before we proceed let us just begin byimporting some of the necessary libraries that we might need . now , i am importing the train testsplit from sklearn.model selection . now , in now because we are going to go about building a modelwe will need a train set on which we are going to build a model and you also need a test set of dataon which we are going to test it . so , given this data cars omit , i am going to reserve a certain part ofit for training and building my model i am going to reserve the remaining part to test my model onand for that you need the train test split function . and i need the linearregression function fromsklearn.linear model and like how the name suggests this is for building a linear regression model .and similarly for a random forest model i want the randomforestregressor and this is a part ofsklearn.ensemble package and apart from these two there are a few heuristics that i am going tocalculate and one of it is mean squared error and that is a part of the sklearn.matrics package . so , iam going to import these four libraries of packages before i proceed . so , let us begin by separatingthe input features and the output features .now , my input features i am going to callthem as x and my output feature which is price i am going to call it as y . so , from cars.omit i amgoing to drop only price and i am dropping column . so , i am just mentioning it as columns and i amjust saying in place equal to false i do not want the changes to be reflected under cars omit right .so , let us just drop only price . so , basically x has everything apart from price . so , we so , cars omithad columns and one column alone we have removed which is price and hence you havecolumns under x contrary to that we want y to contain only one column which is price . so , i amjust saving cars omit and within square indices i am just giving price which makes it y as onlycolumn .and , you have the same number of observations for price . now , this is . so ,x is a collection of all input features and y is my output feature which is price . now , i am just goingto plot the variable price now before i plot it i am just converting it to a data frame which says beforeand after . so , y and then i have transformed y as a log as a natural logarithm . so , let me just runthis command . so , basically you will have two column under prices one is before , the other is after .before is what you have as y and after is after taking the natural logarithm . now , the reason we aredoing it , it will be clear when i plug the histogram which is below .let me just dragthe screen to show you the difference between plotting histogram with pi and plotting histogramwith logarithmic of . so , here you can see there is a nice bell shaped curve the moment you plot thex axis that is natural logarithm of y whereas , on my left i have just done a histogram on just the pricewhereas , on the right i have a logarithm of price . now , here you can see that the shape the righthand side is more bell shaped normal compared to the left the left is most cute and this itself tellsyou that you know we should consider going further with our natural log on the prices and not justwith price . so , we are not going to regress price with the input features , rather we are going toregress the log of price with input features and this log is the natural log . so , let us now transformthe price as a logarithmic value . so , i do np.log y . so , my entire y is now transformed right . this isbecause the range of price is very very huge because you want to avoid it you are taking the log .now , i am splitting my data into testing chain , i am just dragging the output window to the right justto show you the entire command . so , the train underscores test split is the function which we havealready imported . the input to it is the input set of features , the output set of features which is xand y respectively . now , the test side i am giving it as . and which means percent of the datawill go to the train set and the remaining percent will be retained as the test set and i am setting arandom state of equal to . now , random state is a predefined algorithm it is called pseudo randomnumber generator you can give any value to this parameter and i am giving a value of . so , everytime you run the same algorithm the same set of records will go to train and test . so , the output i amsaving it as x train x test , y train and y test . so , the x s represent the input set of features and they s that represent the output feature which is price . so , let me just run this command and once i runthe command i am just printing the shape of each of these . so , my x train is , and i can havecolumns my y train is again . similarly , my x test is and i can have columns andmy y test is . so , this is the shape of the data if you do divided by that is roughlyabout percent right . similarly , if you do divided by that is a free about percentright . you can infer the test train split ratio from here itself based on the number of observations .so , before we move further we want to build a baseline model for this data and in the baselinemodel the predicted value is basically replaced with the mean value of the test data and this is toactually set the benchmark for us and to compare our models that we are going to build in future .so , for this data we are going to build a regression and a random forest model and in order tocompare the metrics from that model we also need a base value or a base metric . and , the basemetric that we are going to use is the rmse value for the base model . so , the base model is whereyou replace the predicted value as the mean from the test value and that i am saving it as base predright and that comes out to be around . and i am going to . so , this is only one value and i wantedrepeated to values which is the length of y test . so , i am just replicating this value overrecords . now , i want to find the rmse value . now , rmse is root means squared error and it is a likethe name suggests is the square root of the mean squared error . so , it computes a between the testvalue and the predicted value squares them and divides them by the number of sample . now , that ismean square error the moment you take a root of that value you get the rmse value which is theroot mean square error . so , you already have a function called mean square error which we haveimported earlier . now , the input to it is the test data right the y test and the base predictions right .so , these are the two value that i am going to give and once i computed i am just going to print it . so ,the base rmse turns out to be . roughly . so , this is a benchmark for comparison . any othermodels that are going to build in future should give you an rmse that is less than this . so , that is theobjective for us .so , now let us start with linear regression for this data . now , i amgoing to call this the omitted data because i have removed all missing values from here . so , thefunction that you are going to invoke first is called the linear regression function . i am setting theintercept as true because i want an intercept for this and i am saving it on to an object called lgr .once you do that you need to fit the model on the train x and train y train x being the inputfeatures , train y being the output features for the train set of data . and , i am storing the model asmodel linear linear has represented by lin . and , once i do that i want to predict my model on thetest set of input features . so , my test set of input features are the x test and i am going to usethe.predict function and i am saving my predictions on to cars predictions linear linear again isrepresented by lin . so , here you can see you have predictions right . now , these are mypredictions . now , i am again going to compute my mean squared error . now , instead of giving a basepredicted value , i am going to pass on the actually predicted values here and again the otherparameter that i am passing is the test set of features that i have from my test set . now , again i needrmse value . so , i am just computing the rmse by taking a square root of this and if you print it youwill see that my rmse for this model which is a linear regression model is . . so , we started at avalue of . with the base rmse and we came down to about . that is roughly about apercent drop right there is a percent change from this value . so , we have come down a long wayfrom there we have started . so , we are at . . now , let us see if we can compute the r squaredvalue . so , the r squared value tells you , so how good is your model able to explain the variability inthe y. now , let us do this for test and train . now , i am going to call the function.score from themodel lin and the input to it is x test and x y test and similarly , if you want to r squared value foryour train you just give the train input . now , i am just calculating the value of for test and for trainand let us just print it out . so , if you print out both these values at test side for the test set my rsquare is . and for my train set the r square is . cutting quite close , but the train seems tobe definitely better and the test is not far behind , it is about . . so , that is a close cut . so , this tellsyou that the model is good . as much as the variability that the model was able to capture in the traindata , it is able to capture the same amount of variability if not more on the test data itself , on thetest data as well . now , let us just do a quick regression diagnostics . now , i am going to calculatesomething called residuals here . now , the residual is nothing , but the difference between your testdata and your prediction . now , the residual is nothing , but the difference between your predictedvalue and your actual value . now , your actual values under y test and your predicted value is underis under cars predictions linear . now , once you do this you can plot i am once you do this i amgoing to generate a residual plot using a simple scatter plot where my x is the predicted the fittedvalue , that is , cars predictions linear and my y is nothing , but the residuals .so , letus just quickly do a regression diagnostic . i am going to use the residual plot analysis . now , i amgoing to generate a separate set of numbers or values that is called residuals . now , it is thedifference between the y test and the cars prediction linear . now , basically residuals are nothing ,but the difference of your actual value or the observed value and the predicted value . so , that iscalled residuals and what i am going to do is i am going to generate a simple scatter plot where my xaxis is basically the fitted or the predicted values and my y axis contains the residual values . so , letus just do a quick scatter plot here . so , i am going to drag the output window little to show you howdoes the plot look . this is good because you want the residuals to be close to . since , residuals aremore or more of errors you want the errors to be less and that tells you that your predicted and youractual values are very very closer and this can also be seen from the describe function . so , if you do aresiduals .described this gives you the summary of the data .and you can see thatthe mean of the data is around . that is very very less , it is almost right and this itself a goodthis itself is a good indicator that your predictor and your actual value is a very very closer now . andthis is the conclusion that it can actually draw from your residual analysis . so , i have just shown youfor one linear regression model and you can just do it with the others as well . so , let us move aheadwith random forest model . now , a random forest model has several inputs and we have alreadyimported the function called randomforestregressor . so , i have a couple of parameters here as inputarguments . let us just quickly go over what these mean .so , i in my help toolbox ihave typed a sklearn.ensemble.randomforestregressor and it gives you a quick description of whatdoes the function do . but , if you come down it also tells you what are the input parameters and whatdo they mean . also mentioned under the parameters are also the default values . so , let us beginwith the first parameter it is n estimators . now , because this is a random forest tree you can haveseveral trees and that is what n estimators does . it basically tells you the number of trees in yourforest .the next is maximum depth which is the depth of each tree how deep do you want eachtree to go and that is given by maximum depth .the minimum samples split is theminimum number of samples that is required for a node to split . so , let us say if you have only twoobservations in a node and you do not want that node to split any further right because it might notmake any sense . so , in that case if you want to impose such conditions you can do it here . the next isminimum samples leaf and it is the minimum number of samples which is required to be at a leafnode .and , the next input is maximum features which is basically the number offeatures the algorithm wants to consider to build the model or to build the tree right . now , there aredifferent options for this . if you give auto , then it automatically chooses otherwise you can givesquare root which is basically the square root of the number of features . so , each tree is built ondifferent features . so , there are other parameters as well which you can explore one by one andthese are the main parameters that you usually start with . again random state is equal to , becausei have just chosen one random state , so that every time i run the model i get the same output .so , now let us just load the function . now , rf is the model now , i do rf.fit to fit the train data . now ,this will take some time , now the model was built using the train set of input and output features .now , i am going to predict this model on the test set . now , if you see under cars predictions rf youagain have predictions ok. now , we are again to compute the mean square error for this andthe rmse turned out to be . roughly . now , this itself is a good indicator that your random forest isperforming better than your linear regression model because the rmse has come down further .computer the r squared value here . so , let us just print out the r squared value . so , i have the rsquared value here now . now , the r squared value for the test is . and the a squared value for thetrain when the train is . . so , definitely random forest is working a lot better compared to thelinear regression model at least for this omitted data . so , now let us go ahead and impute themissing cells in our data and let us now build the same linear and regression , now let us and let usbuild this linear regression model and random forest model on the data where these missing valueshave been imputed . so , i am using the same cars data that we are earlier started with . i am usinga.apply function and within the apply function i am declaring a lambda function . now , the lambdafunction will fill the missing values with median if the data type of the column is float otherwise itwill fill the missing cell with the most frequent category . now , this the second condition will beapplicable wherever your column type is object and the first condition will be applicable whereveryour column type is float either ways both cells will be imputed .now , if you imputeand then you can check the number of null values under each you will see that none of the columnsare missing values . so , in our data we had missing values only for the categorical columns and in thatsense you are all these categorical columns are imputed with the most frequently occurring category .now , let us convert the categorical columns into dummy variables . so , i am going to use the same getdummies function . so , if you look at cars imputed you again have columns and when you do adummy variable encoding , you get columns . so , these are the number of columns that havebeen converted to dummy variables .so , let us again repeat the same drill where iseparate the input features and the output set of features . now , i am again plotting y what you getand np.log of y .and , if you plot a histogram you can again see that value for priceis normally distributed and this is the same as before . so , all our predictions are going to be for a logtransformed value of price . so , i am going ahead and i am transforming it to a natural logarithm .and then i am going to split the data into test and train again and i am using the same split ratiowhich is . and if you print the shape you can see percent of it has gone to train and remainingpercent have gone to test . and , here are the individual split up of the test set and the train set forthe input and output features . so , let us again start by building a baseline model . now , here i amgoing to use the y test i am again going to find the base rmse for this . this is the same function asbefore and just that by instead of having y test , i am doing y test . so , that is the only change that ishere and in this case we have an rmse value of . . so , again let us go ahead with linear regressioni am going to repeat the same set of steps . i am building a model i am fitting the model with the traindata and then i am predicting the test data . so , this is the rmse value . so , i am going to use the samefunction again and if you print the rmse you can see it is . . now , after imputing you can see thatthe rmse value for the linear regression model has gone up right . it was earlier at around . forthe same data with , but without cells which were missing . so , the error has gone slightly up . now , letus go ahead with random forest model for the same data .i am again building amodel with all parameters i have kept the parameters value the same as before just to standardizeboth the methods and i am again fitting the model on the train and predicting on the test . again , thiswill take some time to run . so , the model has run and it is predicted on the test set . so , let us justcompute the rmse again and rmse that you get in this case is . . that is a lot less compared towhat the linear regression model k with imputed data .so , again let us compute the r squaredvalue for this and r squared value for the random forest regression module after imputing turns outto be . for the test set and on the train set it is about . . now , that is a very good r squaredvalue compared to the linear regression model that we had got earlier and similarly , if even if youlook at the rmse value we had got about . and that is a good value compared to the linearregression model on the imputed data . so , let us just print all of these and condense it together .so , basically i am just printing these values , so that we can infer the message . so , i what i am printinghere is basically a condensed form of whatever we have computed till now . i have taken two setsone is a set of metric for the omitted data and the other set of metrics for the imputed data . now , forthe omitted data you can see that the r squared value for train from the linear regression is . ,again on test it is . . so , it is more or less close and similarly , for random forest the r square ontrain is . and the r squared value on point on test is . . now , if you look at the base rmsevalue it is for . and for this data for linear regression the rmse value turns out to be . and thermse value from random forests turns out to be . and these are also the heuristics that we havecomputed earlier . so , this tells you that definitely on at least we omitted data , the random forest isdefinitely performing a lot better compared to the linear regression model . now , moving further tothe imputed set of data if you look at the r squared value from the linear regression on train it is. and it is more or less the same even on the test . and if you look at the r squared value fromrandom forest on the train it is . and on the test it is a . . so , that is again a good value and it isa lot better compared to your linear regression model . and the base rmse for this data is at . andthe rmse value from the linear regression that you record this . , but however , if you look at thermse from the random forest it is at . . so , definitely for the imputed data , there is a hugeremarkable change in the rmse value between your linear regression and random forest model . so ,your random forest model is definitely a lot better than your linear regression model and this is veryimportant because it is if the models are performing good for data where missing values are omittedbecause in that case you have a clean data you are ready full , but most often . but , more often thannot problem comes only when you start impute in sells because you are not sure about with whichvalue you suppose to impute and how the results are going to turn out right . so , at least in this casethe imputation looks like the imputation has not gone really wrong and random forests definitely is alot better than linear regression . and , this is also very and it is also very important to impute valuesbecause you do not want to let go of information and you do not want to let go of the number ofrecords that you have . in the earlier case where we did omit we lost about record , we hadaround on records . but , after imputing , you can see that random forest definitely able tocapture the variations much better than linear regression . so , it is a necessary that you do not let goof information that you already have , but at the same time there is a tradeoff between how muchyou can retain and how much you can leave . so , thank you .lecture case study onregression part iiso , now let us incorporate these cleaning ranges .so , what i am trying to do here is from the cars data i am accessing yearofregistration and putting abound on it . the upper bound for yearofregistration is and the lower bound is , bothranges inclusive . so , from cars i have accessed yearofregistration . now , earlier i have used squarebraces this is the other way of accessing it this is also fine or if you are comfortable with the otherway of accessing then that is also fine . so , next is price , the lower bound for price is and theupper bound for price is , , and similarly for powerps the lower bound is and the upperbound is . so , if you see here , we started with around after removing duplicates and nowlet us see how many records are we losing after this . so , we are roughly losing about recordshere . so , all these changes have been affected into cars . also with yearofregistration it is hard to findout what is the age of the car .so , what we are going to do is we are going to subtractthe yearofregistration from and add the monthofregistration .so , themonthofregistration we are going to divide it by which gives you months in decimals , and i amgoing to create another variable called age that will contain the difference between the yearand the yearofregistration . now , that is the first step . so , i am going to subtract theyearofregistration from the year and then i am going to add the monthofregistration which ismonthofregistration by . so , let us start by doing this .so , first we are going to divide themonthofregistration by . so , let us just do that and see if the changes are reflected .so , whichever entries were earlier in terms of integer , they become with decimal . so , again whenyou add your yearofregistration the difference between and the yearofregistration , when youadd it with the monthofregistration these entries will again be reflected as under age . so ,indirectly we are actually reducing the effect of because if you try and use the monthofregistrationas integer itself . because if you try and use the monthofregistration as integer itself it is going tocreate some problems because is not a valid integer to represent any of the month and the monthsare being represented by numbers to , right . so , because we wanted to get rid of s , we aretrying to divide each of the entries by which means any entry which has a monthofregistration ofwill automatically remain a and that when you add it with the age which is a difference betweenthe year and the yearofregistration and that will eventually go off , right . so , we are not lettinggo of observations which are marked as under monthofregistration , at the same time you are alsomaking sure that it does not affect our analysis . so , we have converted the monthofregistration asdecimals . so , i have just divided by . now , i am going to create a new variable called age in lineand it is the difference between the year minus the yearofregistration for that particularrecord and i am adding the monthofregistration here .you will see that an extracolumn gets added to cars and here you will see the different values of age , because we have addedthe months here you will see values which are in decimals . so , we are going to round off the decimalplaces to , using the round function . so , the input to the round function is the column that you wantto round off and to how many places do you want to round it off to .i am effecting these changesin the same column itself . so , again let us just open and see , yes . so , all these values have beenrounded off to decimal places . so , let us just quickly do a.describe .so , you will seethat the count is again and the mean and the mean age or the average of age is . with astandard deviation of and minimum is , maximum is , and the median lies at . . so , themean and the median are not very far off , the mean is at . and the median is at . . so , weknow the data is not very skewed .so , now that we have incorporated the information ofyearofregistration and monthofregistration into . we can drop off these columns because addingthem is only going to make it very redundant . so , i am going to use the cars.drop function to clear .so , i am going to use the cars.drop function to drop them and i am giving the column names as a list ,and i am giving access is equal to because these are because these are columns . now , once youdrop them you can see that the number of columns have reduced by and the year andmonthofregistration have disappeared , right .so , now let us start by visualizingparameters i am going to first start with visualizing age . so , let us see how does the histogram lookfor age . so , if you look at age here you can see a slightly skewed distribution , it is not extremelyskewed , let me just drag let me just drag the box to show you how does the distribution look . againyou can fit a density curve over it . so , now , again let us plot a box plot here for age .now , we can see a clear cut box here , though above the whiskers there are a few extreme values oroutliers , right . but even this was not possible in the earlier case .so , let us now lookat the histogram for price . now , for price here you will see histogram , even this was not seen earlier ,but now we are able to see a few more ranges .and if you plot the box plot for thevariable price you will see a small box here , earlier what we could really see was just a line , right .now , this is better , but again you still have a few extreme values outside the whiskers . if you look atpowerps if you look at powerps you will see that the histogram is now better , better than earlierdefinitely because earlier it was all bundled up to one side and you can see that the density curve isalso being fit here and you will see more ranges to powerps than it was earlier .so , now , that wehave seen the individual distributions and we have seen the individual histograms and box plot forthe variables , let us see what their effect is on price . so , let us start by plotting . so , let us start byplotting age versus price here . i am using the regplot that is under c package again here .so , let me just drag this output window to the left to show you how does the plot look . so , you cansee that it is a scatter plot and so you can see that it is a scatter plot earlier when you try to plotyearofregistration versus price you would have seen that all these values were bunched up togetherin one end and we could not really see a clear cut effect of age on price , but here it is much better .we can see that cars which are priced higher are fairly newer , so you have age on the x axis price onthe y axis and cars which are priced higher are fairly new . but cars , but there are cars which arepriced a little higher and are still older , so we can treat them as vintage . and on a on a very generalnote with increase in age the price also drops , right . so , this is the effect of age on price . yes , it doesaffect a price to a great deal . but now , let us see the effect of powerps versus price .so , i am again using the same plot to plot powerps with price . my power is on the x axis and my priceis again on the y axis . so , here we can see with increase in power the price increases and that is veryvery clear from this plot because earlier we were not able to infer the effect of powerps on price , wewere not sure , but now that we have arrived at a very very narrow range of working values we cansee an effect of powerps on price . so , with increase in powerps , the price eventually increases . so ,these were the effect of powerps , age on price . of course , age is a combination of yearofregistrationand monthofregistration . so , two variables have been incorporated into a single in the form of asingle variable . now , having done this we are also going to check what are the effect of othervariables on price , right .but before that we have to even narrow down if thesevariables , if these , but mostly the categorical variables if they have enough if there are enoughcategories or if there is enough count under each category for us to even retain them . so , you againhave seller offer type then you have abtest and vehicletype gearbox and there are many morecategorical variables . so , now let us see what is the individual frequency count under each of thesecategories .so , i first i am , so i first taken seller the variable seller and if you look at the valuecount you will see private is and commercial is only . so , the seller variable has twocategories , private and commercial , but one of the category has only one observation . so , we aregoing to drop it and if you are interested from a proportion point of view then you can clearly seethat private almost accounts for percent of the proportion . so , now that we have seen all this ,we can clearly say that the variable seller is insignificant . so , we will also see how to remove it lateron , but just let us identify all the variables which are insignificant and remove them together .so , the next variable is offer type . so , in your earlier data you would have seen two offer type , one isoffer , the other is request . and in this case all the all the records are of the type offer , so wedo not have any of the records under request . so , again this variable is again going to be insignificant .now , moving further let us look at the variable abtest . so , under abtest if you do a value count youcan see there is an equal split between the categories , test and control , right . and from a proportionpoint of view percent , roughly about percent is under test and the remaining percent isunder control , right . so , this is more or less , it is a closed cut its more or less equal and that can alsobe seen from the bar graph here , right .it is cutting very very closely both thecategories . so , both the categories are cutting very very closely . so , they are more or less equallydistributed , but let us say their effect on pricebut even from the box plot it seemslike the effect is more or less the same . so , there is nothing much you can tell whether betweencategories test and control . they seem to have the same median or , they seem to have the samemedian for price . so , there is nothing much that we can infer even from the box plot . so , for everyprice value there is almost a distribution . so , we can not really conclude anything from abtest .so , we are going to treat it in significant .this is vehicletype and if you do a valuecounts for them you will see that the category topping the charts is limousine , followed by that youhave small car , and then station wagon , and then you have bus , and cabrio , coupe and others , suv ,and then others , right . so , for a very proportion based account you can see that limousine is thehighest with about percent and let us just try to understand the proportion or the frequencybetter .from the products see more easier to understand that limousine iscontributing the most and followed by that you have small cars , station wagon and bus , right . so , thisis the order . it is more easier to understand from the plot than from the proportion count whenunder each variable you have several categories , ok .so , let us just see its effect onprice . so , i am plotting a box plot of vehicletype with price . i have just dragged the output window toshow you how does the screen look . so , for different categories under vehicletype , you can see thatthere are different price ranges , right . so , it is all it is all different , there is nothing constant abouteach category and limousine again is very very different from you know coupe or the bus or stationwagon . so , the price are different for different categories . so , yes , vehicletype does affect price andwe are going to retain it in our model .so , the next variable is gearbox . let us look atthe count for gearbox . you have records under manual and the remaining underautomatic and these are the two categories that are available . and if you want a proportion basedview you can see that manual counts for about percent roughly and automatic accounts forroughly about percent , right . and again we can and again we can do a count plot for it which willalso show you that manual gearbox are the most frequent .and from your box plotlet us see if the gearbox has an effect on price .and yes , it does because manual ispriced lower compared to automatic , right and that is evident from the box plot itself . so , yes ,gearbox does affect price and we are going to retain gearbox in our final model .thenext is the variable model which is the model of the car and if you look at the frequency count youcan see that you have about models , right and of course , we can not know the value count for all ,but the model golf seems to be the most frequently occurring . so , moving further we are going tolook into the variable kilometer .now , to check the value counts i have sorted outthe kilometers in the increasing order based on the index using the sort index function and you cansee that the kilometer which is equal to contributes the maximum and in terms of and interms of proportion if you see it contributes to about roughly percent . so , it is the mostfrequently occurring kilometer . so , most of the cars have a kilometer of . and let us see if itseffect on price and i am doing a boxplot for it .so , you can see here that differentkilometers affect the price in a very very different sense and kilometers , so if cars that have traveledlower kilometers like and are going for are being sold or go to rent , lease for a muchhigher price . but whereas , cars which have gone whereas , cars which have had traveled for a lot ofkilometers eventually their price drops , except for this one variable , except for this one case wherethe kilometer is at and the median of the price is very very less . so , this is the only outlier interms of the behavior , but otherwise with increase in kilometer you will see that the price alsodecreases . so , eventually when the car has traveled more , you will see that there is more wear andtear , and hence the price drops , ok. so , this is a take home message with this variable .so , let us now look at the variable fueltype . so , we are going to retain kilometer and now let us lookat the variable fueltype , and if you do a value counts for it you will see that petrol is topping with afrequency of over , followed by that you have diesel and then you have lpg and then you havecng , cng hybrid electro and others , they all contribute for very very small fraction . and in terms ofproportion , you will see petrol is leading with about percent .now , let us just understand thisbetter in terms of a bar plot . on my right you have the bar plot . so , you can see that here diesel , youcan see here that petrol is contributing the maximum followed by that you have diesel and then youhave lpg , but we can not even see the bars for the others because they are very very less . and theeffect of and the count of petrol and diesel is actually smearing out the effect of others which isobvious . so , now , let us just try to understand if fueltype affects price .now , definitelyit does , so from the . so , definitely it affects price and that is clear from the box plot because differentcategories of fueltypes has different price ranges and that is very very clear from the boxplot itself .so , yes , we are going to retain fueltype in our modeling . let us move on to the variable brand .so , if you do a frequency count you will see a whole lot of brands here , but the one that stopping thechart is volkswagen with about occurrences and followed by that you have bmw and opel andmercedes benz and so on and so forth , right .so , again if you do a count plot you willsee different ranges for it . this is how the count plot looks for all the brands and to understand ifbrand would it definitely affect price , we are doing going for a box plot .it is very veryclear from the box plot that all the brands do have an effect , but were not able to see which of theboxes correspond to which brand that is not evident from the box plot , but on an overall note we cansee that different brands have different price ranges . so , the last variable that we are going to lookinto is not repaired or damaged .now , since these are secondhand cars , there isalready some damage that has happened to these cars . now , this variable will tell you whether hasthat damage being rectified or has that damage is just being retained and not looked after , right .now , if there are two levels to , so there are two categories to this variable , one is yes , the other isno . when you have yes , it means that the car was damaged , but the damage has not been rectifiedand the second category says that no the car was damaged , but the damage has been looked after ,right . so , these are the two levels . so , let us look at the value counts for this . so , the category with nois and the category yes is .but if you want to see their effect on priceyou will have to do a box plot which eventually tells you that cars where the damage has not beenrectified are under the category yes and they have a lower price range . so , cars which where thedamage has not been looked after too , are going are being sold or quoted for a lower price rangecompared to the cars where the damage has been rectified . so , there is a clear cut differencebetween the two categories and their effect on price , and hence we are going to retain the variablenotrepaireddamage , right .so , now , i am going to just remove this insignificantvariables here which are seller offer type and abtest from the car . so , i am just collecting their namesas a list and i am using that cars.drop function , and you can see that from we are down to andthat is from the cars data frame , right . so , before we go further let us just make a copy of this datahere . so , this is just to make sure that we do not end up losing the analysis that we have done tillnow .so , before we move further let us look at the correlation between our numerical variablesand i am using.select underscore d types which will select a certain ranges of data based on the datatype that we have , and for this under the exclude parameter i am excluding all variables which are ofthe type object .once i do that you can see that cars underscore select getsdisplayed and we have , columns which are price , powerps , kilometer and age and i want tocalculate the correlation between them .so , i am using the.corr function for this and i amrounding off the correlation to decimal places . so , you have the variables again on the x and on they axis , you have the same variables , it is a matrix , it is a correlation matrix and from here it is littlehard to interpret which of the variables have the highest correlation value . so , i have carsunderscore select.corr which returns the correlation and i am from there i am doing a.locationfunction based on the price , right and this just returns the price and the first column . so , all thatreturns is the first column , right . and i am just taking the absolute value of it and i am just sortingthem in descending order . so , i want values after price and you can see that this is the correlationand powerps has the highest correlation which is about . followed by that you have kilometer at. and age is correlated to price by the value of . , right . these values are not high except forpowerps which shows a reasonable correlation . this is only , this method was to only check if there issome , if there is a heavy dependency of one of these variables or one of these numerical variableswith price and that was the only reason to check the correlation . so , except for probably powerps ,the other two variables do not have a very very heavy influence on price . again the value of thepowerps , again the correlation value of powerps and price is less , but it is not too less , it is referringabout . and that is ok , but it is not very very strongly correlated to price .lecture casestudy on regression welcome to the case study on regression . in this case study we are going totake a problem that is on predicting price of pre owned cars .so , let us go ahead andtake a look at the problem statement . now storm motors they are any commerce company and theyact as mediators between parties who are interested in selling or buying a pre owned cars . nowthese are second hand cars and storm motors act as mediators . now in specific for the year to, storm motors they have recorded the data about the seller and car details . now , these set ofdetails includes specification details , condition of the car , seller details , registration details , webadvertisement details , make and model information and price . now these are several buckets andthere are specific parameters or variables that storm motors as collected and each of these variableswill definitely fall into one of these buckets . now storm motors what they want to do is that , theywant to develop an algorithm that will help them predict the price of the pre own cars and this canbe based on the various attributes that are associated with the car .so , let us seehow to solve this case study in python . so , let us start by importing a few required packages , first wehave going to import pandas for reading all the files from the csv format , then i am going to do a fewnumerical operation and hence i am going to import numpy as well . and i am going to visualize thedata and derive some insides and going to import seaborn for it . so , i am importing pandas as pdnumpy as np and see born as sns . so , let us just import these packages . so , these packages havebeen imported now . now i am setting a dimensions for all the plots that i am going to be generating ,i am using the function sns touch set is a function from the seaborn package and within theparenthesis , i am giving the figure size and this sets the dimensions for rather . and this will set thedimensions for all our plots . so , let us begin by importing the csv file . so , you have been given a datacalled cars sample.csv . now i have already set my working directory and the data is also residing inmy working directory . so , i am just going to right away read it using the pd.read csv function . so , thedata has been read and we have records and columns let us just open and see what doesthe data have to say .so , you have index from to , you have the date crawledyou have the name of the car the seller type , the offertype the price you have a b test then vehicletype and year of registration and there are couple of other variables here , all these have beenexplain to you before the description of the variables . so , now , that we have read let us just create acopy of it . so , you have already seen how to create a copy of your data . so , you can do a deep copyand any change that you made to cars will not be reflected back in cars data .so , i made a deepcopy and i saved it as cars and we are going to be using cars to work here after . so , let us start bylooking at the structure of the data , i am using the cars.info . so , this gives you the structure of thedata . now this tells me that is the data frame it has entries ranging from to , and the totalnumber of columns are here what you also have is a number of non null objects and what is thedata type of each of the column . so , date crawled has , non null object it is an object data typesimilarly you have name for seller type , offertype , price and abtest all these are full and if you takevehicle type that is , non null entries . so , you have some missing values there and similarlyeven in gearbox model and fuel type this will give you just of all the column names and under eachcolumn the number of non null entries and what is the data type of each of the columns .so , far as we have columns which are of in data type and there are column which are ofobject data type . so , now , let us summarize the data i am going to be using the function cars.describefor this .so , when i used cars.describe you can see that there is a. so , when i use awe are do a.describe function , you can see the summary is given only for a few variables and it is notgiven for every variable there are some dots that you see in between now to get rid of this you canuse the . so , when you do a summary you can see the summary is given when you do a.describe , youcan see the description gives you the output in a scientific notation what you also see is that itdisplays the summary of only a few variables and the remaining variables are displayed as . so , letus see how to get rid of the scientific notation first , i am going to use the function.set option .within parenthesis what you have to give is displayed.float format because these are all float valuesand it is for these that you want to change the output . now there is a lambda function that we aredeclaring inside . so , what i am saying here is converted to a three decimal place float value . so , let usjust run this function again and then let us rerun cars.describe .so , here you can seeall the values have been rounded off to three decimal places , but we still and not able to get thedescription for all the columns . so , for that you need to use again the same function pd.set option .so , within parenthesis you can give the parameter display.max columns and it will display themaximum number of columns and the next parameter is basically how many of a columns youwanted to be display . so , i have given a big number here , but usually you will not be seencolumns in a data , but this is just to set the maximum number of columns that can be displayed .so , let us do that and let us read on cars.describe . so , now , you can see that all your columns aredisplayed here and you have a summary for all of it . now price tells you that there are , . so ,under price if you check the count there are , records . so , all the records having field and themean is about and there is a standard there is a huge standard deviation , it is about , theminimum value is the first quartile value is , the second quartile which is also the median is, the third quartile is , but the maximum is very very huge and if you look at the differencebetween the mean and the median which is the second quartile , you can see there is a hugedifference between the mean and the median there is itself shows you that price is very verysecured . and if you take care of registration you have , non null values the mean of year ofregistration is , but this does not make sense because year of registration is an integer and itcan not be rounded off to a decimal . but if you take the minimum of it you can see there are yearsranging from . similarly , if you look at powerps it again has , non null values , the meanbeing around and if you look at the median , the mean being around , but if you look at theminimum value the minimum is which does not make sense again and the first quartile is at around, the second quarter which is the median is around and maximum is very very high , themaximum is around horse power . now then you have kilometer , kilometer has again ,non null entries , it is mean is about , , kilometers , the minimum is again , , the maximumbeing , , .next you have month of registration . month of registration does nothave any missing values the minimum again is . but does not make sense and postal code issomething that we will be getting rid off because we are not going to be using for this case study , butyou can you are free to use this variable if you want to do a more spatial based analysis right . so ,again even for postal code , they are all integers and you can not have decimal values .so , let usjust start by dropping unwanted columns up front . now you have variables like name date crawleddate created postal code and last seen , now we are not going to using these variables for our analysisand i am going to just drop them . so , i am creating a list of all the variable names here and once i runit all of them are stored under col and i am just going to use the.drop function and to drop them . so ,i do a cars.drop and i say columns is equal to col. so , these are the columns i want to drop , sincethese are columns i am giving the axis as . so , from you can see the number of columns havecome to , i have dropped columns here . now , we are going to see if there are any duplicaterecords in our data right and if there are any duplicate records , we are just going to keep the firstoccurrence of that such records . so , we started out with , records let us see when you doa.drop duplicates how many are we will using . so , one , it is come down to . now thatwe have removed it let us get into data cleaning now . so , my first task is to compute the number ofmissing values under each column , now from the.info function we saw not all column were filledright . so , now , we are going to find the number of missing values and each column and later on wewill come up the method of how to logically fill such missing values . so , the first step is to basicallycalculate the number of missing values under each column . so , i am using the isnull function . so ,isnull will basically return a data which is true or false . it will mark the cells which are missing withtrue , but i am going to sum of the occurrences of the trues . so , i am just going to do it.sum for it . so ,if you run the function you can see on my right that seller of a type price , ab test do not have anymissing values now vehicle type has missing values , year of registration is again full , gearboxhowever , has records missing . and under model you can see you have about recordsmissing . and under fuel you can see you have about records missing and about recordsare missing and not repaired or damaged . so , this is a column wise count of the number of cells thatare missing .so , now , let us just take year of registration first . so , in what i amtrying to do is i am trying to find year wise count based on this variable . now , you can usethe.value counts here and i am sorting the index to make sure that , here year of registration issorted based on the years and not on the counts . so , by default if you do a.value counts , you wouldhave seen that . so , it gives you the category with the highest frequency on top , but i do not wantthat i basically wanted sorted placed on the years . so , let us just run this , this is too big output . so , iam saving it onto year wise under count variable .now , if you open and see . so , let usjust see what this data frame has . it has index and it has year of registration index is the set of allyears and year of registration on the that column you basically have the frequencies of each of theseyears . so , you have years that are ranging from and then you have year from and whatyou can also see if you scroll down is that , you have years which are in the future that is which areafter . so , most of these do not make sense so , that is considerable amount of cleaning that wewill have to do for this column . so , let us see how to come up with the strategy to clean them .so , if you look at the sum of records which are greater than then that is only right . this islesser number and we can not predict in the future . we are in , but i am not considering thatbecause it is occurred only twice and it would not make sense to consider it . so , if you look at thenumber of cars where registration is greater than . now , you have about of them recordshave a year that is greater than . now similarly if you do for a lower and check what you canalso see is , i am taking the limit . so , if you look at the cars that are made before or that areregistered before in , then you have about records of that kind right . now these are too lesscorrect and they are going to smear or effect or you know sway the effect of the model . so , we aregoing to get rid of them . so , the working range that i am going to set is between and . so ,just to reconfirm this if you do a scatter plot i am using the sns.regplot .if you look atthis scatter plot , i have the year of registration on x axis and i have the price on the y axis , let me justdrag it to the size just to show you a better plot . so , you can see that the plot is not explaininganything you have all only you have only dots here and there and that is because there are valueswhich are very very high and they are just smearing out the effect on the other points . so , we haveto clean this column to really understand what is the effect of year of registration on price .so ,that is as far as year of registration goes , the next is the variable price . now if you again do a.valuecounts and then you sort based on the ascending order of the price and i am just saving it on to thevariable price count .so , the left is basically the index and that is the value of theprice of the car and the right is basically the frequencies of each occurrence . now that is a too hugerange . so , we have to do tweak it down and even price equal to we will not make any sense , i meanit can be because if you want to just sell it for a few dollars or a few for a very low amount you can .but then we are looking to generalize this model for a workable range of data and these values arethese values can be very very extreme right . so , there is nothing wrong in selling a car for a lowerprice , but then we would like to generalize a model that would come up with the better prediction ,but however , these if you have these values when they are going to smear the effect out . so , we aregoing to do check on this as well and we are going to arrive at a working range that is easy for us tounderstand right .so , now if you do histogram which is using the distplot right .you can see that because there are a lot of entries under the zero prize category . so , this issomething that we have to work on .so , let us just quickly reiterated by even lookingat the describe . so , describe also tells you that the mean is about , the median is way of themedium is around . now there is a huge different than this itself accounts for the skewness inthe data and the minimum here you can see is again and the maximum value is also given . so , therange is really really wide and we have to narrow it down to come up with the generalized model .so , let us just quickly do a box plot . now a box plot also tells you that there are some outliers hereright if i do a box plot for the price , you can see you can not even see the box . in fact , what you justsee is a line . now this itself tells you that there are considerable outliers in your data which are veryvery extreme in nature and hence you not able to really see the behavior of the variable . so , let usjust do a quick check of the range . so , i am setting the range between to lakh and ,dollars . so , the first is to see how many cars are price above , , dollars and that is about andif you do a price check on the lower end you will see that cars a price lower than , but this isbecause dollars to lakh and s decent range to work with . so , the next variable that we aregoing to look into is power ps . now again if you do a.values count and then you sort it and now i havesaved it under power count .so , here again you will see that the power values are onthe extreme left and the right hand side is the frequencies of each . so , records have a poweragain we have the same problem because the range is too diverse and we can not really inform much .so , we have to again narrow it down . somewhere in between you have a lot of occurrences of oncesome of them are two extreme for instance you have , horsepower that is very very extreme .and which is occurred only once and so , we have to narrow down the range of power ps as well . so ,let us just do a distplot just to see if there is any skewness yes there is you can see that from hereitself because of entries that are of . so , this is something that we have to take into account we haveto clean it up .and if you do a.describe , this will also show you this skewness we havealready done this before just reiterating it here . so , the mean is about and if you look at theminimum it is and if you look at the first quartile it is around it is around and if you look atthe median , that is around . though the mean and median are not far away the standarddeviation is quite huge . now for a mean value of if you are going to deviate by around unitsthen that is a lot right . so , though the mean and the median are not very far , but they are still farthere is still some skewness . but if you look at the range of powerps it is too diverse and you alsohave values that are around . so , you just even if your mean and median are very very close youalso have to take into account the standard deviation in the data and in this case it is very very hugeright . so , we are going to take up this we are going to tweak the range down , but before we do thatlet us just quickly see if this is also getting reflected in the box plot .this plot is a lotbetter compared to the price plot that we are earlier did there we were just able to see a line at leasthere you are able to see a small box . so , yes of course , you have some extreme values here that areactually compressing the box . so , we will have to deal with this , we have to come with a workablerange of data . so , let us just plot and see if powerps has an effect on price before we clean it up .again it is all bundled up together on the lower end and i think that is because of the values that are, we have to clean it up before we further do anything with this variable because otherwise wewill not be able to see the effect of this variable on price . so , let us just fixe a range . so , i am fixing arange between and , now i have arrived at all these ranges by trial and error also the idea isthat you do not want to let go of too many records correct . so , i am going to check the number ofcars that have a powerps of greater than and that is about and if you take the lower rangeand if you take the lower value the number of cars that are less than it is about . these arefrom trial and error and that is considerable reading that has been done to even check you knowwhat is the minimum power that you need to start any vehicle . so , the working range year ofregistration is between to , the working range for year of registration is between toand for price we are stick into to , , dollars and the working range for powerps variable isfrom to . so , now , that we have checked the working range for three variables we are nowgoing to clean the data by giving these variables and any further modifications we are going to do inthe clean data .lecture case study classificationso , by exploring on thedata we have looked at the distribution of each of the variables and the relationship that existsbetween the variables . so now , we are going to build a logistic regression model , logistic regressionis a machine learning classification algorithm that is used to predict the probability of a categoricaldependent variable . so , using logistic regression we will build a classify model based on the availabledata . the first step that we are doing here is re indexing the salary status names to and becausethe machine learning algorithms can not work with categorical data directly . so , categorical datamust be converted to numbers . so , we can assign to less than or equal to and one to greaterthan using the map function and we are giving the values using the dictionary . where we havemapped all the less than or equal to string values to and greater than to an integercalled , so let us run that .so when you open the data to data frame you will be ableto see the salary status values as zeros and ones . so , the method that we used here is integerencoding . so , that we can invert the encoding later and get labels back from integer values such as inthe case of making a prediction and using the pandas function to get dummies . we can convert thecategorical variables into dummy variables which is called as one hot encoding . it refers to splittingthe column which has the categorical data to many columns depending on the number of categoriespresent in the column . so , let us see how to do that . so , we are using the get dummies function andinside the function we have specified the data frame name and i have stored the output to new dataframe called new data .so , when we open the new data if you see here if you checkthe data frame each column contains or . so , let us take the example of the jobtype variable ,jobtype earlier had seven categories to it , so each of the categories have been spiltered in tocolumns . so , that the column has only the value and . for example , the first row sees it has oneunder the column called jobtype private , then it means that the first row corresponds to the privatejobtype . similarly you can interpret for the other values . so , now , we have mapped all the stringvalues to integer values , so that we can work with any machine learning algorithms . next we aregoing to select the features where we need to divide the given columns into two types that is onehaving independent variables and one having the dependent variables .the dependent variable weare going to represent using letter called y and the independent variables being represented as x .for that we are going to store the column names as a list , by accessing the column names from thenew data dataframe and we are storing it under a list called columns list . so , it will have only thecolumn names from the new data dataframe . so , now , we need to separate the input variables fromthe data . so , let us exclude the salary status variable form the columns list and store it as features .so , from the list columns list we are going to exclude only the variable salary status . so , that we willhave only the independent variables and storing that output to variable called features . so , let usprint features and see what it has . so , it basically has all the column names from the columns list ,where we do not have only the salary status value . so , if you look at the variable explorer originallythe columns list had values , when we excluded the salary status variable from it the features listhave only the features list have only values . but here we just have the column names now , solet us store the output values in y using the .values , the .values can be used to extract the valuesfrom data frame or a vector . so , i am going to extract the values from salary status and store it into y .similarly , we can do that to extract the values from features . so , that you will have all thecorresponding values from the independent variables and then we can store it under the variablecalled x. now x and y contains the integer values , where the x dimension is cross and the ydimension is . next we are going to split the data into train and test we have to divide thedata set into a training set and a test set . so , that we can build the model on train set and deservesome part of data to test the model on . this can be done by using the train test split command , theinput parameters for the train test split command would be x and y , where x represents the inputvalues and y represents the output values and then comes the test size . i have given it as . thatrepresents the proportion of the data set to include in the test split . the next is the random state ihave given a value i have given an integer value as . so , here random state is the seed used by therandom number generator , so that each and every time you run this line while sampling same set ofsamples will be chosen . if you have not set the random seed then different set of samples will bechosen for the analysis and i have saved the output into four different variables train x test x train yand test y. so , let us see the dimension and what are the values that each of the variables have . so ,first what we have done here is we have splitted our data into train and test , under train we havetwo sets of data which has only the input variables and the other will have the only the outputvariable . similarly , we have done it for the test set as well . so , the test will contain the input variableseparately and the output variable separately . so , if you look at the train x size percentage of thedata is contained in train x which is observation with variables .and the train y willhave only the output column which will have only the values as zeros and ones . similarly if you lookat the test x size it has percentage of the data to it that is observations with variablesand the test wise dimension is about observation with only the salary status as outputvariable . now you have split out the data into train set and test set . so , next we are going to create alogistic regression classifier instance using the logisticregression function . so , here is the functionthat is logistic regression . so , let us make an instance of the logistic regression classifier .then we can fit the model on the train set using the fit function and input for the fit function shouldbe the input variables and the output variable . so , we have that under train x and train yrespectively and i am using the logisticregression instance here to fit the model on train data . so ,now we have fitted the model on to the train data . so , you can extract some of the attributes fromthe logistic regression classify model by using the model name that is logistic and by using the.operator you will be able to access some of the attributes from it . so , let us get the coefficients ofthe logistic regression model . so , so in the console you will be able to get the coefficient values of allthe variables . similarly if you want to look at the intercept value you can also get that . so , you canget that by accessing the intercept from the logistic regression model . so , the intercept is . . so ,now we have build the model which will be used to classify the individual salary status as less than orequal to or greater that . so , now we need to predict it on to a new data set , so that wecan see how the model is performing . so , we have over data frame called test x which the model hasnot seen yet . so , i am going to predict the model on to the test x data frame using the predictfunction and i am saving my output to a variable called prediction . so , that my so that the predictionswill be stored in to the variable called prediction . so , let us print the prediction and see what it hasideally it should be having only the values are zeros and one , which basically gives you the salarystatus of the test data frame . so , now we have built a logistic regression model and we have alsotested it on to a new data frame called text x and we also got the predictions . so now , we have toevaluate the model using the confusion matrix , confusion matrix is a table that is used to evaluatethe performance of a classification model . the confusion matrix output gives you the number ofcorrect predictions and the number of incorrect prediction and it will sum up all the values classwise . so , let us see how to use the confusion matrix in order to evaluate the model . so , confusionmatrix is the function the input should be just the actual and the predicted values , the actual salarystatus is under the vector test y and the predictions are under the variable prediction . so , those canbe the input for the confusion matrix and we are storing the output into object called confusionmatrix . so , let us print the confusion matrix and see the output . so , in the output you have fourvalues , the diagonal values gives you the total number of correctly classified samples and the offdiagonal values gives you the total number of wrongly classified samples . so , in the column what youhave here is the predictions and in the row wise what you have is the what you have is the class forthe actual and in the rows you have the actual classes . for example , if the actual class is less than orequal to and the model has predicted observations as less than or equal to but beingless than or equal to is the actual class the model has predicted observation as greaterthan . similarly given the salary status is greater than given the actual salary status is greaterthan , the model has predicted thousand observation as greater thanobservations as less than or equal to . so , there are many misclassification secure the modelhas not classified all the observations correctly . so , using a measure called accuracy we will be ableto get the accuracy score of the model that variable . so , it gives as an idea about how accurate ourmodel is . so , you can get the accuracy for the model that we have built using the function calledaccuracy score , the input can be the actual class and the predicted class and we are storing it into avariable called accuracy score and when we print the accuracy , so the values turned out to be. . so , it means that percentage of the time the model is able to classify the recordscorrectly . so , now we have got an idea about how many misclassifications are there and what is theaccuracy for the model that we have built . we can also get the misclassified values from thepredictions , like how many number of misclassifications are there you can do that by setting a simplecondition you can get that by giving a simple condition . so , if you print the output it saysobservation has been misclassified . so , now you got an idea about how many misclassified numberof samples were also there . so , now we have built a logistic regression model , but you can alsoimprove the accuracy of the model by reducing the number of misclassified samples . so , one of themethod is by removing the insignificant variables , when we exclude more on the data we found outthat there were sum in significant variables that might not contribute more in classifying theindividual salary status . so , we are going to ignore those variables when we model it . so , what we aregoing to do here is we are going to build a new logistic regression model by removing all theinsignificant variables .so , let us first map all the less than or equal to to andgreater than to and then store it to the original data frame salary status and then store it to thevariable called salary status of the data frame data and then these are the variables that whereinsignificant that is gender , nativecountry , race and jobtype and i am creating the list of columns andi am storing it under the list called calls and i am going to drop all these listed columns from the dataframe data , so that i am not going to consider all these variables when i model it . and the new dataframe is created by dropping out all the insignificant variables to proceed with the further analysisand after removing the columns we need to get the dummies of all the categorical variables . so , weare also doing that and the other steps remind the same like i have stored all the columns names intwo columns list and then i have separated the input names from the data by excluding only thesalary status variable . so , features will have only the set of column names of the input variables andwe are going to extract the values in y and we are going to extract the values from salary status andstore it into y. similarly we can also extract the values from the features and store it as x and thenagain we are splitting the data into train and test . so , that we can build the model on train and wecan use the test data frame to test the model on and then we are creating an instance call logisticfrom the function logisticregression , which is used to build the logistic regression classifier modeland we are using the instance created that is logistic . we are going to fit the logistic regressionmodel on the train data and after building the model we can predict the model on to the new dataframe that is test x. so , once we have got the prediction we are interested in getting or we areinterested in improving the accuracy by removing all the insignificant variables . so , let us checkwhether the accuracy has improved by removing all the insignificant variables , we are going to getthe accuracy using the accuracy score function . so , when we print the accuracy score the accuracy isturned out to be . which has higher than the accuracy score that we have got from the modelwere we have used all the variables . so , the accuracy has dropdown from percent to percent ,because we have removed all the insignificant variables . so , by removing the insignificant variableswe are not getting a better model which gives us the better accuracy , when we remove any variablesof course we are losing some information from the data . so , that could be the reason that is why weare getting a decrease in accuracy , but as compared to the model with all the variables it is not verylow it is just a slight decrease in the accuracy . so , if you want to reduce the data collection part , if youwant to retain only the significant variables which is used to classify the data . then we can remove allthe insignificant variables and keep this model as the final model .now we havelooked at the performance of the logistic regression model , so similarly we are going to build a knnmodel , knn classifier model to classify the records into any one of the categories of the salary status .so , to build a knn model we are going to import k nearest neighbor classifier package from thesklearn neighbors . so , we have to import that , so after importing kneighborclassifier we areimporting the matplot library we are importing pyplot from matplot library as plt . we will be usingthe matplot library to visualize some of the outputs of the k nearest neighbor classifier model so letus import that . so , after importing the necessary libraries we are creating an instance for k nearestneighbors , we are creating an instance for k nearest neighbor classifier using the function kneighbors classifier and inside the function i have specified n neighbors as that is the k value . so ,that it consider five neighbors when classifying the data into less than or equal to or greaterthan . so , if it considers neighbors , then it will take the majority classes from the neighborsand then it will classify the new data based on the majority voting method and we are also saving theoutput to an object called knn classifier . so , knn classifier is the model , so using the instance thatwe have created using the k neighbor s classifier that is knn classifier . we are going to fit the modelon to a data frame called on to the train data frame using the fit function and input to the fit functionshould be the input values and the output values of from the train data frame . so , now we havebuild the classify model using the knn algorithm now let us see how the model is performing in anew data frame . so , we have a test data frame so that we can test a model on . so , i am going topredict the model on to a new data frame called test using the predict function . so , the input shouldbe the input values of the test data frame and i am saving the output into a variable call prediction .so , the prediction will have the values of the salary status as zeros and one , where represents lessthan or equal to and represent greater than or equal to . so , now , we have predicted thevalues and you have also seen the values from the prediction output . now , it is time to check howgood of a model is performing using the confusion matrix . so , the input can be the actual values andthe predicted values of the salary status , which is there under test y and prediction respectively andwe have also save that to a variable called confusion matrix .so , now , let us look atthe output of the confusion matrix . so observations have been classified properly as less thanor equal to observations are correctly classified as greater than or equal to with theactual class . when the actual salary status is greater than , but the model has classified it as lessthan or equal to . so , now we have using the confusion matrix we have got an idea about howmany misclassified samples are there and how many correctly classified and how many correctpredictions are there . we can also look at the accuracy score using the accuracy score function wecan also look at the accuracy of the model that we have built using the accuracy score function andthe input to the accuracy score function should be the actual and the predicted classes of the salarystatus . so , let us print the accuracy score . so , the accuracy of the knn model is . ,percentage of the time the knn model is able to classify the records correctly . if you want to checkhow many number of misclassified samples are there you can also check that using the samecondition that you have already used for the logistic regression , when we check the output themisclassified samples are for the knn model that we have built . so , now under the neighborsargument while we are building the knn model we have just randomly fixed a k value as . so , herewe are trying to calculate the error for k values between and by iterating through for loop . so , ihave given the range as to , so that the k neighbors classifier will takes the k value from toand builds the model based on the k value , since i have given i under the neighbors . so , once youhave created an instance called knn we are going to fit the model on the train data frame using thefit function and the train x becomes the input values and the train y as the output value . so , oncewe have build the model you are going to predict it on to a new data frame called test test x usingthe predict function . so , all the creation of instance building the model and predicting it on test arehappening inside the for loop . so , that for each and every value of k you will get a different modelsand once we have predicted and the predictions are stored into a variable called pred i. so , that youwill have the predictions under pred i and in the next step we are going to look at the number ofmisclassified samples when we fix the k values from to . so , you will have the misclassifiedsamples for each and every value of k that we have fixed here . so , let us run the whole for loop andsee what is the output . so , the print so the misclassified samples will give you the number ofmisclassified sample with respect to each values of k. so , based on the output you will be able toarrive at a k value for your k nearest neighbor model , wherever you have the less number ofmisclassified samples you can fix that as the k value to build any k to build the knn model .so , from the output it is clear that for the k value we are getting the number of misclassifiedsamples as . so , if we fix the k value of then the model was performing good , because we aregetting a less number of misclassification . then we can fix this as a k value when we build a when wewant to improve the model further . so , that so that we will not end up in misclassifying the salarystatus . so , in this case study we have looked at two algorithms , one is logistic regression and theother one is knn both of the algorithms gives you the same performance when we looked at theaccuracy and in terms of number of misclassification . but on the whole the logistic regression isperforming better with the accuracy of percent that when the knn model gives you the accuracyof percent but we can also improve the model further by dropping few more insignificantvariables in the logistic regression as well as in the knn classifier model because in the knn classifiermodel that we have built here is only with is only including all the variables we have not excludedthis insignificant variable and check the accuracy . so , we can also do that to improve theperformance of the classifier model that we have built .hello all , welcome to the lecture on thecase study . so , in this lecture , we are going to look at a case study called classifying personal income ,where we are going to see how to solve that problem using python .so , let us look atthe problem statement of the case study that we are going to solve . subsidy inc. is a company whichdelivers subsidies to individuals based on their income . and accurate income data is one of thehardest piece of data to obtain across the world . so , they have obtain the large set of data onindividual income , demographic parameters , and based on few financial parameters . so , they wish usto develop an income classify system for individuals . the main objective of the case study is tosimplify the data system by reducing the number of variables to be studied without sacrificing toomuch of accuracy , so that the data collection part would be easier . if we have very few parametersthat needs to be measure , then the data collection part will be easier . so , that such a system wouldhelp subsidy income in planning subsidy outlay monitoring and preventing misuse . let us quicklylook at the variables that are available in the case study that we are going to solve .the first variable is age which represents the age of the individual in years . next one is a jobtypewhich represents the working status of a person which sector does he work in like federalgovernment local government and so on and so forth . next is the educational type the level ofeducation like th , masters , doctorate and so on . next one is the maritalstatus the maritalstatus ofthe individual , whether a person is married the worst or never married and so on . next one is theoccupation the type of work the individual does whether the individual is working in an armed forcesor sales or technical support and you have eleven more categories like that .next oneis relationship of the individual to his or her household . the next one is the race it is beingrepresented by black , white and more . next one is the gender the individual s gender beingrepresented as male and female . the next one is the capitalgain the capital gains of the individualbasically from selling an asset such a stock or bond for more than the purchase price . next one is thecapitalloss the converse of that , the capital losses of the individual from selling an asset such as astock or bond for less than the original purchase price . next one is the hoursperweek , the number ofhours that the individual works per week in a company .and we have nativecountryof the individual being represented with like categories like united states , with countries like unitedstates , cambodia , canada and so on and so forth . next one is the last one is the salary status whichis the outcome variable . the outcome variable indicating whether a person salary status , whether itis a less than or equal to , . so , it has basically two categories less than or equal to , andgreater than , . so , this is the overall idea about the problem and the description of thevariables . now , we are going to go back to spyder and we are going to see how to solve this problem .so , now , let us start by importing required packages . to work with data frames , we are going toimport pandas as pd . and to perform any numerical operations on it , we are going to import numpyas np . followed by that , we will be visualizing the data using the seaborn library . so , we are going toimport seaborn as sns . followed by that , we are going to import train test split from the packagecalled sklearn and the model selection is a sub package under sklearn . so , we are going to importtrain test split from sklearn package . after that we are going to import logisticregression fromsklearn linear model . and to look for performance matrix , we are going to import accuracy andconfusion matrix from sklearn matrix . so , now , we have imported the required packages . now , let usimport the data into spyder . so , income is the filename and it is in csv format . so , now let us importthe data into spyder . income is the filename and it is in csv format , we going to read that and wehave storing it onto a data frame call data income . so , once we read the data , we can see it underthe variable explorer .so , the data underscore income is of data frame and the size ofthe data frame is observations with columns . after reading data , we are going to create acopy of the original data , so that original data frame will not be touched . and further analysis will bemade on the copy data frame . so , we are going to create a copy using .copy function and we arestoring it on to a data frame called data new data frame now . so , now , we have read the data . now ,it is time to explore the data to understand the data even more better . so , under exploratory dataanalysis , we are going to broadly look into three topics the first one is getting to know the data ,where we basically see what type of what type of variables that we are going to deal with . the nextthing that we are going to see here is data pre processing , where are we going to deal with missingvalues like how to identify the missing values and how are we are going to deal with that . and afterthat we are going to understand the data through visualization and cross tables , because we will belooking into checking the relationship between the variables using cross tables and data visualization .so , basically once we write the data we would be interested in getting the data type of each variable ,so that it gives an idea about what type of data that we are going to deal with . so , .info commandon a data frame gives you the data type of each variables . but if you check here all the variables areread with expected data type , because age is read as integer , jobtype , from jobtype to gender , it hasbeen read as object because those have only categories to with and capitalloss , capitalgain ,hoursperweek have been read as integer , because those variables have numerical variables . and thesalstat nativecountry has been read with object data type , because we know that their existcategories under that variable . so , it has been read as object . so , now , we have seen what are thedata types of each variables and we know that all the variables are read with the proper unexpecteddata type . so , now , we will check whether there are any missing values in the data frame using aisnull function . so , let us check whether there are any missing values . so , basically a isnull returnsboolean values that is true and false true indicates the missing data and the false indicates there areno missing data in a particular cell . but if you see the output , it will be difficult to skim through thewhole output . so , let us take the sum of missing values in each column , so that we will get an ideaabout how many values or how many cells are missing under each variable . so , this can be done byadding dot sum to the existing command . so , let us see how to do that . so , this is just the printstatement , but the actual command is here data.isnull.sum . so , if we execute this line , you will getan output which says no columns have missing values , because the corresponding values of eachvariable are . so , it represent that there are no missing values under any of the variables . so , nowwe have checked whether there any missing values in a data frame or not . now , it is time tounderstand the data by getting the descriptive statistics out of it . in our data frame , both numericaland categorical variables are there . so , the descriptive statistic can give you great insights into theshape of each variable , so that describe function can be used to get the basic descriptive statisticsout of data . so , i am going to use the dot described function on a data frame data . and i am storingthat output to an object call summary num , because by default the describe function gives you eightstatistical properties of numerical variables .the first one being count mean standarddeviation minimum percent , percent , percent and the maximum value . basically the counttheir count represent the count of observations under other particular variable that is age . when welook at the mean of age , the average age of the individual is turned out to be years . and thestandard deviation is around and the minimum age of the individual is years the next ispercent that is percent of the individuals age is less than years . the next is percent themedian age is years here . next is percent , percent of the individual age is less than years ,at last you have maximum value we know that at the max the age of the individual is years .similarly , if you look at the capitalgain , it is a profit from the sale of property or an investment , sowhether the sale price exceeds the purchase price . so , if you look at the capitalgain , it is a profitfrom the sale of property or an investment , where the sale price exceeds the purchase price thenonly we call it as a capitalgain . if you see on an average the capitalgain of the individual is andthe standard deviation is really high that is . and if you look at the maximum value , it is ,but the minimum value is . so , in this case , it turned out that only percentage of the capitalgainis greater than that is why you have nothing under from minimum to percent age , because it isvery evident that very few people will be investing in stocks or any other investment , so that theyget some profit out of it . so , conversely a capitalloss arises , if the proceeds from the sale of a capitalor a asset are less than the purchase price , it is turned out that only percent of the capitalloss isgreater than , though the maximum values , the minimum value is still . so , similarly you canlook at the spread of the hoursperweek , like on an average individual spends hoursperweek in acompany . similarly , you can look at the other statistics . and we also have categorical variables in ourdata frame . on that note , we would be interested and getting the frequencies of each categoriesunder a variable . so , the same command is being used by setting include is equal to o , o representsobject . so , let us see what the output gives us . and we are storing that onto a object callsummary cate that represents summary for categorical variables .so , basically whenyou set when you set include is equal to o , it gives you four measures starting from count , countbasically gives you how many observations are considered while giving you the summary and thenunique , unique represents , how many unique categories are available under that particular variable .for example , under jobtype , we have nine unique categories . and next is the top which gives you themodel value of the variable that is the most frequently occurring category . so , for jobtype the mostfrequently occurring category is private . and you can also get the corresponding frequency . hereobservations correspond to private category . similarly , you can look at the frequencies of thecategories that are available under other variables . but from this output , we now just know howmany unique values are there , but we would be interested in getting the unique categories under avariable , so that it gives us an idea what are the categories that are there in a particular variable . so ,for that case , in that case , the value counts gives us the better representation . so , let us see how touse the value underscore function . so , i am just going to take the first variable that is jobtype . i amgoing to get the frequencies of each categories that are available under jobtype . so , basically thisgives us the better representation by listing all the available categories under frequencies . if you lookat here , it basically gives you the frequencies of each categories under jobtype . you can also seethere exist question mark instead of nun . so , there exist a question mark instead of nan , because bydefault python only reads the blank cells as nan not other special characters . in this case , we have aspecial character , but it is not being read as nan , but we have encounter that there are some missingvalues in the form of question marks . similarly , we can also get the frequencies of categories usingthe value counts for other variables , but it turned out that occupation also has question marks here .but when we looked at the data , there were only question marks under two variables that isoccupation and jobtype . so , to basically see how exactly the special characters are , we can use theunique function . so , let us check the unique classes of jobtype . so , basically unique function is fromnumpy library and inside the function as specify the jobtype from data frame data . so , if you seethat there exists the special character which is question mark there is the space before the questionmark , this is how exactly the levels of the jobtypeare being entered . so , if you see here before thestarting letter of the every level , there is a space in front of it . so , similarly we have a space in front ofquestion marks also , this is how exactly the special character is been entered here . so , now , we knowthat there are some special characters which is just the representation of missing values . so , what weare going to do here is , we are going to go back and read the data by including the na values toconsider the special character as nan . by adding na values with a list of a string values we are goingto consider this special character as nan values .so , once we have executed this data ,you will be able to see the data frame size is observation with variables . now , we have seenhow to consider other special characters as nan values . now , it is time to pre process the data .basically now we know that there are some missing values in a data frame to deal with the missingdata , we need to first identify the missing data and then we can examine the missing value pattern .so , by using the same isnull function , we found out that cells are missing under jobtype andcells are missing under occupation and no other variables have missing values except jobtypeand occupation . so , before deciding on how to deal with the missing data , let us see in a particularrow either one of the column is missing or both the column values are missing . for that let us subsetthe rows at least one column is missing in a row . so , here we going to subset the rows by giving.any axis is equal to , so that it considered at least one missing column in a particular row . now , wehave subset the rows with missing values . if you look at the size of the data frame , it is . it iswith rows with variables .so , now let us open the missing data frame andinspect the missing data . so , it is very clear that whenever jobtype is missing , the occupation is alsomissing , but the total number of missing values is rows . so , there is a special category callednever worked and the corresponding value of the occupation is nan . since the jobtype is neverworked . so , if you saw the jobtype , so if you saw the jobtype there is a category called neverworked . if the individual has never worked , then occupation could not be fill that is the reason youhave nan values under occupation . so , now let us go back to the script in window and see and whatwe going to do with it .so , let us quickly note some points that we have got from themissing data . so , missing values in jobtype is equal rows . so , there are rows that aremissing under occupation and there are rows where two specific column that is occupation andjobtype have missing values . so , there is the difference between and that is rows . youstill have occupation and fill for those seven rows because jobtype is never worked that is why thetotal number of missing values is . now , in this case we can delete the cases containing themissing data or replace the missing values with reasonable alternative data values . if the data are notmissing at random , we have to model the mechanisms that produce missing values as well as therelationship of interest which is very complex in these contexts . so , here we are going to remove allthe rows with missing values in consider only the complete cases alone . so , in that case , we are goingto use a command called dropna . and by setting axis is equal to , we are dropping out all the rowswherever there are missing values . so , if you look at the size of the data to data frame that isrows with variables that means , that we have gotten read of rows wherever they weremissing values , why because we could not find out the mechanism that goes behind which producethe missing values and we do not know the relationship of interest as well . so , we are going in thissession , we are going to remove all the missing values and we are going to continue with the furtheranalysis . so , with complete cases let us look at the relationship between numerical variables that isbetween independent variables using the correlation measure . so , you can get the correlation , youcan get the pair wise correlation using the .corr function using the corr function . so , and i save myoutput to a variable called correlation onto an object check called correlation .so , letus look at the correlation values . so , if you look at the correlation values , none of the variablescorrelation , so none of the values are nearer to most of the values are nearer to . it representsthat none of the variables are correlated with each other because the correlation values lies fromto . and if it is closer to , we say that there is a strong relationship between two variables and if itis closer to , then we say that there is a there are no a little correlation between variables . so , inour case , none of the variables are correlated with each other . so , now , we will consider thecategories categorical variables to look at the relationship offered .so , now we willlook at the gender proportion using the cross table function . so , here i am accessing the columns ofdata basically it gives you the column names of each variable , so that you can use the columnnames in the further analysis . so , here we are going to look at the gender proportion using the crosstable function . and by setting normalise true , you will get the proportion table . and you will givethe variable of interest under the index column . and let us look at the output . now , if you see heremale are high in frequency that is percent corresponds to male and only percent correspondsto female . so , now we have got an idea about what is the proportion of gender that we have . now , itis time to check how salary status varies across the gender . so , we are going to look at the two waytable where we are going to check the relationship between gender and salary status . and in a row iwant gender , and in columns i want and in rows i want gender , and in columns i want salary status .and by setting normalised is equal to index , i am going to get the row proportion equals to .so , from the output , it is very clear that only percent of the female earn greater than usdollars and percentage earn less than us dollars , but men are more likely to earn morethan when compared with women . on classification problems , you need to know how balance theclass values are . for example , you need to know the proportion of your output variable . so , let usvisually look at the frequency distribution of the salary status using the count plot function fromseaborn and the variable of interest is salstat , because we are going to look at the bai plot of salarystatus .it is very clear that around percentage of the observation corresponds to less than orequal to and only percent corresponds to greater than . so , now , let us plot thehistogram to check the underlined frequency distribution of the age variable . so , i am using i amgoing to plot histogram using this plot from the sea born library and for the age variable . and bysetting bins is equal to , i will have only ten bins to interpret from and i am setting kde is equal tofalse , so that i will have the frequency is on the y axis . so , from the histogram , it is very clear thatpeople with age to are high in frequency and we also have the records for the other ages , butbetween to , the frequency is high . similarly , we can generate cross tables and plots tounderstand the relationship between other variables . so , if you want to do a bivariate analysis tocheck how age is affecting the salary status , then we can do a box plot to check how salary is wearingacross age .so , people with , so people with to age or more likely to earnmore than us dollars , but people with to age are more likely to earn less thandollars . so , similarly you can generate the cross tables and plots to understand the relationshipbetween other variables .using python we will look at the relationship between thevariables using cross tables and a visualization . so , now , i am going to quickly take you through theexploratory data analysis through slides , where i am going to show you the relationship betweenvariables using the same commands that we have used in the python .so , first we aregoing to look at the jobtype versus salary status . so , first we are going to look at the relationshipbetween jobtype and salstat . so , here is the bar plot which gives you an idea about what is thecount , what is the frequency of each category it is available under a jobtype . so , for example , if yousee here most of the individuals work in a private organisation and very few work in the stategovernment or federal government organisation . this is the frequency distribution of the jobtype .but if you want to see how salary is wearing across the jobtype , then we can look at the cross table .and i have highlighted only a single row which will give you an idea about what is the percentagesplits for an individual . if he is if he is self employed then what is the percentage spilt that , he willearn greater than or less than or equal to . for the greater than it turned out tobe percent and for the less than or equal to it is percent . and for the rest of thejobtype more or less more or less percentage of the individuals earned less than or equal toand the rest of the percentage belongs to greater than . only for the self employed peoplethere is an equal proportion more or less equal proportion for both the categories . and on the wholefrom the above table , it is visible that one whole if you look at the jobtype , it will be an importantvariable in avoiding the misuse of subsidies .so , next we will look at a variable calleducation . let us just look at the frequency distribution of education . education basically has toomany levels to it starting from preschool to doctorate . and if you look at the frequencies of eachcategories only the higher secondary graduation has the highest frequency . people most of thepeople have finished the higher secondary graduation , and followed by some college . and if you seehere the blue bar is the representative of less than or equal to and greater than . so , now let uslook at the relationship that exists between the salary status in education to see how the salary stateis varying across the education type .so , we are going to use the cross table for that .so , from the table it is , so from the table we can see that people who have done doctorate , mastersand professional school are more likely to earn above us dollars per year when comparedwith the other education type . so , that it and hence it can be an influencing variable in avoiding themisuse of the subsidies .next we will look at a variable called occupation . this is thebar diagram of the occupation variable . and if you look at the categories under the occupation , it hasso many to it starting from administrative , clerical and it has so many categories like armed forces ,farm , fishing , technical support and other services . if you try to interpret how salary status isdependent on occupation , then there is a clear demarcation because there is no equal length of barsfor both the colours like for less than or equal to or greater than for each and every level of theoccupation the salary status , the proportion or the frequency of salary status is differing . so , let usget an a clear idea using the cross table .so , here is the cross table for occupationversus salary , so that we will get an idea whether the salary status is dependent on occupation ornot . so , from the output , i have highlighted two levels here , one is executive managerial and theother one is . so , i have highlighted two levels one is executive managerial and the other is profspecialty . and those who make more than us dollars per year are more likely to work as amanagers and professionals . hence it can be an important variable in avoiding the misuse ofsubsides . so , let us see how this variable is impacting the salary status when we build the model .capitalgain is one of the variable that we have from the data frame which is an important variable .because if the capitalgain of the individual is high , then the salary status could be high . so , this couldbe one of the important variables to classify the individuals salary status and the plot shows thefrequency distribution of the capitalgain variable . though the capitalgain is ranging from to lakh ,though the capitalgain is ranging from to lakh , but there are more observations in between thebins to , so that means , percentage of the capitalgain is which corresponds toobservation , and only percentage of the people have gained something from selling their asset or again profit out of their investment . so , this could be one of the important variable to classify theindividual salary status . so , let us see whether capitalgain is an important variable when we buildthe model capitalloss values are also ranging from to , but percentage of the capitalloss is. so , in our records either we have the records for capital gain or loss because either they will loosedor gain from the investment . and if you see individual s capitalloss is , so either they wouldhave not invested or the capitalloss is for them or the capitalloss is still that could be the reasonbecause they have not invested or they have not loss anything from their investment . so , let us seewhether this will be an important variable when we try to when we try to include this in a model .the next one is the hours spent variable . so , the plot shows the relationship between the salarystatus and hour spent using the box plot . on the x axis , i have the salary status on the y axis i havethe hours per . and on the x axis the salary status is represented as greater than and less than orequal to . and the plot shows the relationship between that the relationship that exists betweenthe hours spend and the salary status . here we are going to check how the salary status is vary withrespect to the hour spend by the individual in a company . and if you see here from the plot it isclearly visible that those who make more than us dollars per year or more likely to spendbetween to hoursperweek on an average . and others variable can contribute in classifying theindividual s salary status since there is an association between salary status and hour per week .because when you consider the less than or equal to category , the median is very low whencompare to the greater than category . and the minimum hours spent and the maximum hoursspent by the individual is also very low that could also be the reason that is why they are earning lessthan us dollars per year . but all these interpretation that we have made are from the datathat we have , it might decorate with respect to different sense of data .welcome to the casestudy descriptions for this course . i hope till now you have practiced and learned enough python , tobe able to do programming comfortably . our aim now is to basically help you understand , how youcould use python as a tool in solving actual data analytics or data science problems . and we aregoing to give you two case studies that we will teach and one of them is on classification problem ,and the other one is a function approximation or a regression problem . so , what i will do , is in thislecture i will explain or introduce this classification problem that you are going to solve . and then wewill go through the data and actual solution to the problem in another lecture .so ,the problem statement is as follows let us say there is a company called subsidy inc. which deliverssubsidies to individuals based on their income . so , if your income levels are different , you getdifferent subsidies and so on . however and whenever someone new comes in , it is very difficult toget information about personal income . so , that is one of the most difficult pieces of data to get . so ,here is an idea in terms of using an already existing database , where we have various attributes ofthese people and wherever personal income has been disclosed we also have that as a data . so ,what we are trying to do here is , we are trying to see , if we can somehow classify an income levelbased on the attributes that we have for individuals . so , basically this becomes then a classificationproblem , where we are going to say the individual has an income level beyond a certain value orbelow a certain value . in this case we have this income level as and what we want to do is wewant to classify individuals with less than personal income and greater than personalincomes . so , this is basically a simple classification technique . and you one might ask , if you wereable to do this how can you use it if you have multiple customers that come in , then we can kind ofidentify the proportion of customers who are likely to be having an income less than and thepercentage of people more than and that could allow us to be able to plan an outlay ofresources and so on . so , that is one use case that you can think of . another use case is really , ifsomeone actually discloses an income and if it is an outlier in terms of , let us say someone says theyare earning less than but our classifier says with all these attributes it is very very likely theincome is greater than , then it might allow us to look at those particular cases in more detail ,so that there is no misuse of these schemes .so , whenever we have a problem , data scienceproblem all of this starts with data . so , we first need to understand the data that we have . so , in thiscase you will be given a data set , which was about samples that is individuals forwhom this data is available including their personal income . and this is the data set that is going tobe used in developing this classifier . now i talked about features for this individual . so , we are goingto look at multiple features . in this case we have features that we are going to look at , and onevariable which is personal income which makes the total number of variables . so , if you want tothink of this data in a matrix form , then we have about a matrix of the size times . now letme quickly go through the variable definitions and what type of variable they are and theirdescription . and this will help you to kind of visualize this data once you actually start working onthis case study with the instructors . so , one variable is jobtype . so , this is a string and this basicallytells us about the working status of the person is he in and works which sector he or she works in , itis federal government , local government , private and more such identifiers for jobtype . educationtype is again string , which tells you the level of education and the multiple possibilities or th ,masters , doctorate and more . marital status is again a string , which tells you the marital status ofthe individual which could be divorced , never married and so on . occupation is again another stringand the type of work that the individual does it , could be armed forces , sales , tech support andmore categories in this case . and as we talked about this you can start getting an idea of why thesevariables are relevant for this problem and you can really see that all of these variables are relevant ,because the pay depends on the sector that you work in , the level of education , the type of work youdo and so on . so , as we go along you will see that there is this notion of picking relevant data that isuseful for this problem .so , moving on , there is a variable called relationship whichtells you the relationship of an individual to his or her household , so this could have value such ashusband , wife and so on . the race of the individual black white and more gender of the individualmale , female . and then there are other features that talk to the real financial aspects of theindividual . so , there is one variable called capital gain which is the capitalgain of the individual whichis a rounded off integer in this case capitalloss another integer again a rounded off integer whichbasically as the name suggests is a capital loss . and the hoursperweek that the individual works againit is rounded off and the type is as integer .and also there is a variable which sayswhich nativecountry that this person comes from , which could be united states , cambodia , canadaand so on . and then finally , the output variable which is what we are trying to build a classifier forwhich is salary status , which is outcome variable , which is basically in this case just split intocategories less than or equal to and greater than those are just the two categories . so ,basically what we have here is a binary classification problem where there are two categories lessthan or equal to and greater than . and based on the feature set that we have , we haveto basically build a classifier that will be able to tell us once we get a new customer . and we put thefeatures of that new customer into the system get an information about salary status . now , noticethat some of this input features themselves might be difficult to get such as capital gains and capitalloss and so on . nonetheless what we will try to do is , we will try to see what best in terms of aclassifier we can build and then one of the ideas as i will point out later is also to reduce the numberof input variables and themselves . so , instead of , let us say we build a classifier with thesevariables and then we drop a few and then see the performance does not change much . but from adata collection effort in the future it might be much easier to get information about certain thingsand not other things , then we can see whether we can use those of ideas to actually build a classifierthat is practical and useful in the future .now , whenever you do a data scienceproblem , you basically have to think about it in some flow process . this flow process i have explainedin the other courses that i have taught but just quickly as an overview in this course on . i just wantto go through this , so that we can see how we kind of map the solution that we build in this case tothis flow chart . the very first thing is to basically say , what the process statement or the problem is ,right . so , now , in this case we have already done this , but if someone just came and gave you thisdata and then says you know we are collecting a lot of data and this is the data that we have , isthere something worthwhile or useful we can do with this data . then one problem statement mightbe to say , look can i figure out the salary status of the person based on just the features in terms ofthat individual several attributes . and that is a precise problem statement that you can post here ofcourse , with this data itself you can post other problem statements , but here we are going to stick tothis . and typically when it is a very large data science case study , clearly this is not , this is in terms ofdata still odd data is not small by any means but it is still not large by any means either . moreimportantly this is a very simple binary classification problem . in many cases when you arepresented with a problem , it is really not obvious exactly what data science problem you need tosolve . so , in those cases , you have to think about some notion of problem conceptualization .breaking down a very loosely worded problem statement into multiple smaller problemstatements and then under identifying these smaller problem statements as what type problemsthey are either classification or function approximation problems . and then once you are able tosolve the smaller problems , how do you put them in some logical arrangement of solution . so , thatyou can solve the larger loosely frame problem . so , that is actually where the intellectual exercise ofdata science comes in . but in this case , in this first course this is a simple problem you directlyunderstand that this problem can be conceptualized as a binary classification problem , so there isnothing much more to do here in this case . then once you have a binary classification problem , youknow there are several tools that exist some of which we have taught to you . so , how do you use acertain tool or how do you pick one tool out of these many tools that are available . again there is avery logical way in which you can do this , you can make some assumptions about the underlying datadistributions and model types and so on . and then choose a tool that is relevant for thoseassumptions and then see whether the tool works and all that . that is little more sophisticated datascience thinking . again in this course what we are going to do is , we are going to simply look at acouple of tools and then run those tools on this data set and then basically we are going to judgewhich tool is better based on just outcomes in terms of the prediction error or the confusion matrixand so on . so , once you do that method identification , then basically you have to realize that solutionin some platform of choice . as i mentioned before the two most popular platforms of choice arepython and r. and in this case we are going to use python to solve this problem . and , once you solvethis problem and you are happy with the results then that is the end of this whole data analyticssolution , strategy or methodology .so , now , let us look at this . so , as we said before ,problem conceptualization is pretty simple here we are developing an income classifier forindividuals . we have also added another small aspect to this problem which is not really obviousunless you start thinking about it carefully like i said before you could say i will use all the featuresand build the model , but we would also like to see if we can reduce the number of features and getcomparable performance of the classifier . and as i mentioned before the reason is , then it makesthis solution , practical to be used in the future . so , for example , if you are totally tied to knowingeverything in the input future and without those you can not find a solution , then you might not beable to use it as effectively . whereas if you were able to reduce the number of feature , so that thereare a few things that you need to know to be able to make a prediction , those kinds of systems aremuch more useful . so , that is another additional wrinkle i would say , that we have introduced intothis problem . so , again we had the data set of columns one of them is an outcome variable , theother are independent or input variables from our viewpoint . and of those , are numericaland are categorical and this is a classification problem . in fact , this is a binary classificationproblem and this is also a supervised classification problem because in the data set that we aregoing to use to build a classification model , for every data sample we know the outcome variablevalue . so , basically we are going to supervise our learning algorithm . so , that it learns the givencharacteristics of the data . so , apriori known all the dependent variable , dependent variable which iscategorical binary we have already talked about it and also the independent variables which arebasically a combination of numerical and categorical variables .so , if you think aboutputting all of this into a flow chart based on the extra wrinkle that we threw into the problem intrying to reduce the number of input variables that we need to solve the problem . so , we start withdata , then we build a classification model supervised classification model and then once we buildthe model we validate the model on test data . so , this is another important idea in all of data scienceand data analytics if you use all the data that is given to you and build a model , then the model isvery likely to do well because it has seen all the data . so , basically all of data science or dataanalytics is useful , only when we can use that really in predictions as we see more samples or moredata that comes in . so , we want to have some notion of how well our algorithm is likely to do when iget new data . so , to identify that what we do is , we basically split the data into what we call as trainand test data and when we build a model , we basically build a model using the train data , and thenwe test this model based on the test data we have left out within the data that we had . now , if ourmodel does quite well on the test data which is not seen before then we can be comfortable thatthis model is likely to work in the future also . so , that is what we have here as validate model on testdata . and once we have this validated model where we are happy with the performance on the testdata , then we can do something called a variable importance step which is , if i have thesevariables that i am using to predict the salary status , is there some way in which i can look at thesevariables and order them in terms of importance . so , what do we mean by importance ? so , if i wereto ask you , pick one variable which is the most important for predicting this , what would thatvariable be right then if i ask you pick two variables which are important for predicting the salarylevel as less than or what would those two variables be from these variables inputvariables ? so , if you keep asking this question , at some point once we have a certain set of variableswhich you can use to figure out , whether the salary level is less than equal to or greater than. then adding more variables , if it is not really improving the performance tremendously ,particularly on the test set then what you do is , you basically say you know maybe or or orwhatever the number turns out to be those many number of variables are good enough to predictthe outcome variable . again as i mentioned before , what this does is that , it makes it usable infuture .so , this is what we will do in terms of the steps and you will see python code and pythonexercises , which does each one of these steps and you will be taught this based on the other thingsthat you have been taught in python . the first step is to identify is data is clean . what that means , isthat if there are certain categories for each of these variables , all the data are they in the samecategory . so , for example , if you are expecting to see a string , do you see a string or in some casesome other number and so on . so , basically some kind of consistency check in terms of yourunderstanding of the data and does the data confirm to your understanding is the first step . andwhen you do this test of whether data is clean or not , there might be cases where there are certaindata points that are missing . so , for example , if there features that we are talking about , not allindividuals might have disclosed all the features . so , there might be rows where certain columnsmight be missing . so , for example , some people might not have disclosed capital gains or capital lossand so on . so , those are rows with missing values , those are samples that are not complete inthemselves . so , how do you handle this , how do you look for missing values there are two thingsyou can do , one is to remove all the samples which have incomplete data . the upside is you are notgoing to introduce any artificiality into this problem but the downside is you will lose a lot of datapoints . and it is important , because when we have features , let us say there is only one featurethat is missing if you throw that data , you are also throwing the other feature information withthat sample . so , you lose some information through this loss of data . the other approach is to saysomehow i am going to fill that missing value , and there are multiple ways of filling missing values .then the upside is we retain the whole data set , but the downside is we introduce some artificialityand which we do not know whether it is right or wrong . because whatever procedure that you comeup with to fill your missing data , it is based on some assumptions you make . and if thoseassumptions are not truly satisfied or they are violated , you might be imputing or putting in valueswhich might not be close to the true value . so , that is the downside . so , we have to think about howwe do this and basically depending on what percentage of data is missing and so on we make somejudgments . and basically , then we will start looking at some descriptive statistics to think abouthow to identify variables , which impacts salary status tremendously and are there relationshipsinternally between these input variables and so on . and if there are these relationships betweendifferent variables so for example , if a particular category variable when it takes a value , anothercategory variable takes some value and they are correlated all the time . let us say if this is takingsome value , i can predict the other categorical variable will take some other value if you havesituation like that , then using both the categorical variables in your classification is not very useful atall , because it is redundant information . in those cases can be combined in this category , so that wedo better better could mean better in terms of performance or better in terms of future use . andfinally , we want to build a model with this reduced number of variables , to classify the individualsalary status and basic idea or the use case for this is , you can plan subsidy outlay , monitor andprevent misuse .so , as i said before , there are very rational ways of choosingtechniques for different problems , but that means , that you have to have some information , someknowledge about the underlying data and so on . if you are going to have really not muchinformation , you are just going to try different things one standard thing that everyone doesnowadays , is to take a number of these techniques and then apply all of them on the sameproblem , and simply pick the technique that does the best , right . so , that is a very practical andutilitarian viewpoint of data science or data analytics algorithms . and it works in many cases ofcourse , the upside is you do not have to really know too much about what the algorithm does evenyou just need to know if i have a binary classification problem , there is this laundry list of techniquesthat i can use . so , if you have understanding at that level , then you can start using it . the downsideis subtle and in most cases it might not be a problem , but in some cases it can be a serious problemwhich is that , if the data is you know biased in terms of how the sampling has been done and so on ,and it is not truly representative of what is happening . then sometimes you might have a techniquewhich works really well with this data , but when new data comes in it might do very poorly . so ,always it is a good idea to understand the data and then kind of pick a technique but in this casewhat we are going to do is , we are going to pick all of these techniques and then run them . andonce you run those techniques , this is where python comes in you whatever you have learned inyour coding and so on , you will use that to realize the solution . and basically you will evaluateperformance metrics . so , in this case how well it does on the test data , is a good performance metricto check . and typically if we had made some assumptions about the data , then you will kind of tie inthis with the assumptions that you made and then see whether everything checks out . but in thiscase , if you are just picking a list of techniques and then trying them on all you are going to look atis , how well is it doing on my test data and then simply pick the best method in terms of the resultson the test data . so , this is the introduction to the problem . this will be followed by a lecture onactually a solution strategy with python code , in terms of loading the data , doing all of this . so , thatyou get the feel of doing a complete data science project in this course . thank you . departmentof computer science and engineering indian institute of technology , madras lecture dealingwith missing values welcome to the lecture on dealing with missing values .in theprevious lecture we have analyzed the data with complete cases . the complete cases in the sense ,we have not considered the missing values in the analysis wherever they were missing values wehave omitted those missing values and then we will proceed with the analysis . that would not be thereal case scenario , because in a real time scenario you would be having lot of missing values whichyou will be dealing with , in that case they need to be your way or an approach on how to deal withthose missing values . so , in this lecture we are going to see how to identify the missing values andsome of the approaches to fill in those missing values . so , these are the major concepts that we aregoing to see in this lecture .so , prior to importing your data into spyder , we need toimport some of the necessary libraries that are required for the analysis . so , we are going to importthe os library that has to change the working directory . so , that you will be able to access the file ,then we are going to import the pandas library as pd and this is to work with data frames , so that wecan use any functionalities that are from the pandas library . next we can now change your workingdirectory by using the chdir command , inside the function you just need to give the file path of it . so ,i given the file path once you set your working directory you will be able to access the file in yourcurrent working directory .. next let us import the data into spyder , i am importingthe toyota.csv which we were walking on , and i have said the first column as my index column and ihave also given some set of string values that needs to be considered as python nan values and ihave save my output on object called cars data . now , cars data becomes the data frame , whatever iam going to do that should not be reflected in the original data that i have now rather i can justcreate multiple copies of data , so that i can work with the duplicated data . so , let us create copies oforiginal data . so , using the.copy command , so i am creating the copy from the original datacars data and saving that as a new data frame called cars data . so , this is one copy and i haveneed also another copy called cars data from the cars data data frames . so , i have now twocopies of data from the original one that is cars data , and cars data . now , we are going to seehow to identify the missing values .. in pandas data frames , missing data isrepresented by nan . and nan is just an acronym for not a number . so , whenever you have a blankcell in your csv file , the python will automatically read it as nan value . so , all those nan values willbe treated as missing values in pandas data frames . and if you want to check that null values inpandas data frames , there are several functions that are available to do any operations that arerelated with dealing with missing values . we are going to considered only the two functions that areused to check the null values in pandas data frames , two of it has been shown here . the first one isisnull and the second one is isna both of the functions will account for the python default nanvalues . these functions can be used to check the null value city of pandas data frames . becausebefore proceeding with how to deal with your missing values , you need to identify whether there areany missing values or not or how many of them are there . in that case these functions would bereally helpful to do that these functions basically returns a data frame of boolean values which aretrue for nan values . and , these functions returns data frame of boolean values which are true fornan values . basically , you will get an output with only true or false values . so , wherever you havenan values it will you will see it as true , and wherever you do not have nan values rather you haveother values then you will have the value as false . we will see now how to use these two functions .. so , as i have mention these isna and isnull are the functions that are used to check the missingvalues in the pandas data frames . so , we are going to get the count of missing values present in eachcolumn . let us see how to do that , because i do not want to look at how many missing values arethere in a complete data frame rather i will just want to look at how many number of rows aremissing under each column . so , that it will give me an idea on how to proceed with the missingvalue , so that it will give me an idea how to deal with that missing values . so , the syntax isdataframe.isna.sum , in order to get the count of missing values present in each column . and you canalso use isnull function with the same syntax . so , i have shown the code here that is carsdata isna.sum . we will see what the dot sum is used for . similarly i have used it for isnull , thoughboth of the functions give you the same output and gives you the same information you can chooseany one of it . so , now let us look at the output . so , the output shown is , the output shown here isfor the function isna . and you are getting the column names correspondingly you are also gettinghow many number of rows are missing under that particular column . for example , age has rowswhere there are missing values , kilometer has rows where there are missing values similarlyfueltype has rows with missing values , horsepower has only rows with missing values , and themetcolor has rows with missing values none of the other variables have missing values . so ,now we have got an idea about how many number of rows are missing under each of the columns .now , we got an idea about how many number of rows are missing under each columns . now it is notenough to know that , because we need to check whether rows missing under age is completelydifferent from the rows that are missing under fueltype , or there are any sequence , or there areany combination of missing values that are available in our data frame . in a same row , you want tosee whether only one column is missing or multiple column values are missing because wheneveryou have missing values you need to have two types of approach . one is to completely get rid of allthe rows wherever there are missing values . and the other one is , to have an approach to logically fillup those missing values . so , these two cases depends upon the problem that you have . so , if youhave a row when all the column values are missing or most of the column values are missing thenthere is no point in refilling the missing values with any substitute value right , you can just get rid ofthat particular row alone . in that case , removing the rows will help you and even if there are andthe second thing is if there is no pattern to your missing values like if it is just randomly missing allover the cells , then you should go and look at an approach to fill in those missing values . in that casewe this numbers will not give us an idea about that , we need the subset all the rows and see wherethe missing values are there and then we can decide on what we have to do with the missing values .so , now we are going to subset the rows that have one or more missing values , because i need toconsider a row wherever there are only one column is missing and as well as more than one columnis missing . in that case , the code shown here will do that , from the cars data , i am subsetting therows wherever there are missing values using the function isnull and i have given.any of axis therepresents column . i am telling the function give me all the rows wherever at least one columnvalue is missing . and we have save that to an object call missing , so it becomes a data frame . let seehow the missing values are or now let us see where the missing values are there . so , once you readthat , you will get that in your variable explore . let us check the dimension of it , it is a data framenow and the dimension of it is rows with columns . so , there are rows , where at least onecolumn value is missing . so , now let us see where the missing values are there .. rightclick your missing data frame , you will get this window . so , the snippet shown here is the missingdata frame and i have flitted out all the rows wherever there are missing values under the agevariable . and , if we look at the corresponding columns , there are no missing values accept only one .there is no pattern to the missing values , it is just missing completely in the random case because itis completely randomly missing under each variable . if you were to subset all the rows whereverthere are missing values under kilometer , then that is also the case . you do not have any pattern to itthat holds good for the other columns . i have just shown you for an example , to illustrate that thereare no pattern to the missing values that are there here , rather the missing values are completelyrandom in the variable age . so , now , and in that case , we can not just go ahead and drop all themissing values that are there in your data frame , because if you consider removing a row whereverthere are at least one missing value then you will get rid of observation from observations ,right that is a huge loss of information that you are going to have . now , we should have an approachto fill in those missing values .. what can be the approaches to fill the missing values ?there are several ways to fill in the missing values . in this lecture we are going to look at two ways ofapproach the first way is filling the missing values by mean or median , in case of a numericalvariable that is one of the standard way or that is one of the simplest way based on which you can fillin all the values . so , for any numerical variable you can look at the average of it or median of it , thenyou can have that value to fill in all the missing values . similarly , you can look at a model value forthe categorical variable to fill in all the missing values in your data frame . the model value is nothing ,but whichever category of the variable has the highest frequency if that category occurs mostfrequently , than you can replace all the missing values with that category itself . so , these are the twoways of approaches that we going to see to fill the missing values here . as i mentioned there areseveral ways through which you will be able to fill in the missing values as well .so ,now we are going to impute the missing values prior to that we have to look at the description toknow whether numerical variable should be imputed with the mean value or the median value right .because if you are going ahead and filling it filling the missing values with the mean value that couldalso be a problem , because if you have any extreme values in your data that might cause you themean value very high or very low . if you have very low value in your data that can tweak your meanvalue to the lowest value but if you have an extreme value in the other end , like higher end thenthat can also mislead your mean value . in that case you should always go for median , because awhile calculating the median you basically sort all the values in ascending order and you will betaking exactly the middle value , if you have odd number of observation . but if you have a evennumber of observation , you will take the middle two and then you take an average of it and thenyou will use that value as the median . we have to know about the distribution of the variables tobasically decide on whether we are going to imputed with median or mean . so , dataframe.describeis the function that is used to get the descriptive statistics that summarizes the central .describefunction basically . so , there is a function called describe , you can use that for a data frame , so thesyntax is the data frame.describe . the describe function basically generate descriptive statistics thatsummarize the central tendency dispersion and shape of data sets distribution and that excludesall the nan values and give you those statistics . so , now , we are going to check that using thedescribe function . so , this is how we use the function , we use the describe function followed by thedata frame name .. so , let us look at the output of it the input being shown here andthe output being shown here . so , if you look at the price variable , it basically gives you count , mean ,standard deviation from minimum to maximum it is called as the five number summary , because itgives you minimum maximum and the three quantiles of it . so , the count gives you how manynumber of observations are there under price and the mean is nothing , but the average of the price .the average of the price of the car is euros , and the standard deviation is around , theminimum price of the car is , and percent represent that percentage of the price of thecar is less than , and percentage of the cars price is less than euros . and if you look atpercentage , then you can say that percent of the cars price is less than , and themaximum price of the car from the data frame that we have here is . so , when you look at thenumerical variables the missing values are there under age , kilometer , and horsepower . so , if youlook at the mean of the age , on an average the age of the car is around months and if you look atthe median you can see that , median is also represented by percent . so , you can say that and thevalue being here is the mean and the median are closer , there is no much deviation from themean . so , according to the age variable we can go ahead and imputed with the average age itself ,instead of going ahead with the median value . next when we look at the kilometer , the averagekilometer that the car has travelled is kilometers and the median kilometer when the car hastravelled is kilometers . but if you see there is a huge difference in the kilometers travelled ,there is about thousand and odd difference . so , in this case the mean is far away from the median .so , in this case you can not go ahead and impute it with the mean , because that gives you a highernumber that can be a reason because of any extreme values under the kilometer variable rather wecan go ahead with the imputation of median for the kilometer , because it basically gives us theexactly the middle value of it . so , we can use median for kilometer . and then we can look athorsepower , the average horsepower of the car is , the average horsepower of the car isand the median horsepower of the car is . there is no much difference between and , wecan fill in the missing values using the mean value .. so , now , let us try to impute themissing values of the age variable , so for that , as we know that since there is no much differencebetween the mean and the median , we are going to impute the age variable with the mean value ofit . so , let us just try to see , what the mean values for age variable . so , let us calculate the meanvalue of the age variable by using the mean function . and you can use the mean function along withthose specified variables from a data frame . i am accessing the age variable from cars data averageage of the car is turned out to be months old . now we are going to use this value to replace allthe missing values under the variable age . so , to fill any na or nan values using a specified value ,there is a function called fillna . again there are so many functions that can be used to replace themissing values with a given value but here i am illustrating you the example with fillna function , youcan use that on a data frame . so , the syntax being data frame.fillna , we will see how to use thisfunction . basically the function is used to fill in all the blank or nan values with the given value . so ,basically inside the fillna function you can specify the value with which you are going to replace allthe missing values with . so , here i have given the function that needs to be used to calculate a value ,and that value can be used to fill in all the missing values . i have not given the exact value here ,rather i have just journalize the function saying so calculate the age mean , calculate the mean of theage variable and then use that value to fill in all the missing values of the age variable . and what isthe value , i have shown here that is . . basically i wanted to fill in all the missing values on thedata frame cars data . so , i have given inplace true . i break the line here for the presentationpurpose , you can continue in the same line also . so , now , we have replace the missing values underthe age variable . so , now , we are going to impute the missing values of the variable kilometer .so , here as we saw from the kilometer variable the mean values really deviating from the medianvalue that might be the reason , because they can be in extreme values under the kilometer variable .so , to get rid of that confusion we are going to use the median function . so , that it will give us theexact middle value of it . so , we are going to calculate the median value of kilometer to see what themedian value is ? the median value you can calculated using the function median followed by thevariable from a data frame and then you got a value called that means , that the mediankilometer that the car has traveled is kilometers . so , now , we will use this value to replace allthe missing values . so , we are going to use the same function that is fillna . so , i am going to apply thefillna function on to data frame called cars under the variable kilometer , and inside the function ihave just given cars data kilometer.median . so , that the median value will be calculated from thekilometer and then that value will be used to replace all the missing values . and i have given inplaceis equal true , so that all the missing values will be replaced in the existing data frame itself . so , now ,we are going to impute the values , now we are going to impute the missing values of the horsepowervariable .so , if you look at the horsepower variable , we have seen that the mean andmedian are not very far away . the mean was closer to the median , so in that case we can go aheadand impute the missing values of the horsepower with the mean value . so , here i am calculating themean of horsepower by accessing the horsepower variable from the data frame cars data . and ifyou look at the output , the average horsepower of the car is . and odd . so , now , we are goingto use this value to replace all the missing values of horsepower . so , using the same function fillna , iam replacing all the missing values using the mean of horsepower and we are filling the missingvalues in the existing data frame by giving inplace true . now , we have replaced the missing valuesunder all the numerical variables like age , kilometer , and horsepower .. so , now let uscheck for the missing data after filling those values . so , now , we have replace the missing valuesunder age , kilometer , and the horsepower let us see whether there are any missing values underthat or not , yes there are no missing values . but if you can see there are still missing values underfueltype and metcolor , because we have not still touched on that variables . so , now we are going toimpute the missing values of the categorical variables .so , as i mentioned earlier for anycategorical variable , the simplest way to fill in the missing values of categorical variable is to checkfor the most frequently occurring category and then replacing that with the missing values . so , forthat we need to understand what are the categories are there under the fueltype , right and weneed to understand the corresponding frequencies as well . so , for that there is a function calledvalue counts that can be applied on to a series . and the value counts basically returns a seriescontaining counts of unique values . the output of the function will give you the values in thedescending order , so that the first element is the most frequently occurring element and it gives youthe frequencies of each category by excluding all the na values by default . so , we do not need toremove the missing values and then get the frequencies of it , by default it excludes all the missingvalues . so , this is how we use the function . cars data is the data frame name , under that i amaccessing the variable called fueltype by giving.value counts you will get an output which is shownhere . for example , the petrol has the highest frequency that is observations are of petrolfueltype , and the only cars have diesel fueltype , and only cars has cng fueltype . in this caseit is very clear that the model value would be petrol if you want to get the model value separately ,then you can also do that , you can also use the same function you can give the index as ..since in python the indexing starts from , the will give you the first value of the output ofvalue count . what would be the first value of the value counts output ? it would be petrol , becausesince it has the highest number of observation it was shown at the top . so , when you access it usingthe index , you will get a value called petrol . now you will be able to use this value to fill all themissing values of fueltype variable . let us see how to do that you can use the same function thatis.fillna . i am using the same function from the cars data data frame i am accessing the variablefueltype . and i am applying the fillna function on it , saying that and inside the function we need togive a value , so that the missing value will get replaced . here i am not giving petrol directly , rather iam giving the whole function here , so that the code will be generalized it is you do not need totweak it whenever you want it , because just to write a generalized code . so , here i am filling all themissing values with the most frequently occurring category of fueltype . so , petrol will be used to fillin all the missing values of the variable fueltype . and you know here , we have used inplace true ,so that we are replacing the existing data frame itself . now , by using fillna we have replace thefueltype missing values with the petrol fueltype , we are going to now consider the metcolorvariable .here also we are going to impute all the missing values of metcolor with a model valueof the variable metcolor . metcolor basically the metallic color of the car , basically it will have a twovalues . as we know the metcolor has two values represents the car does not have a metalliccolour , and represents the car has a metallic color . so , there are several ways using which you willbe able to fill in the model value . in the previous example , we have seen how to fill in the missingvalues using value counts and accessing it from the index . now , we are going to use the modefunction to calculate the model value of the categorical variable . so , to get the mode value of themetcolor , we can use it as data frame and access the respect to variable and then use thefunction.mode . the.mode function gives you an output which is shown here , it basically gives thevalue along with the index . the mode value of the metcolor is . , since it has missing values it isgiving you an floating points that is . , ideally it should be . and the index of the value is . so , whyyou are also getting in index , while calculating the median or mean you would not be able to get theindex . because median or mean can only be a scalar value but mode can not be a scalar value ormode need not be a scalar value . mode can either be bimodal , there are many cases where avariable can have bimodal or more than two models , so in that case you will have continuous index .in this case , since our variable metcolor has only one value as more you are getting only . so , now ,to fill in all the missing values using the specified value , we use the function.fillna . so , now , i have usethe fillna function on to a variable metallic color that is from the data frame cars data and insidethe function i have specified that , calculate the mode from metallic color variable and replace all themissing values . so , here i have also given the index to it , that is just because the output alwayscomes with the index if you have bimodal , then you will always have another index as and you willhave another value , that will be the case where you have a both the categories have the samefrequency . in that case you can choose any one of the value which is required for the analysis buthere which is more important for the analysis . but here , since i am very clear that i have only onevalue and that the model values index is , i have given it has . and i am making all themodifications onto the same data frame called data , so i have given inplace true . so , now wehave replaced both fueltype and metcolor variable . now we have replaced combinedly bothnumerical as well as categorical variables using different approaches .. so , let us checkfor the missing data after filling in all the values , using the isnull.sum function that has to be appliedon to the data frame . in a data frame cars check whether there are any missing values . if there areany missing values get the sum of it under each column that is what the function describes . and ifyou see here none of the columns have missing values now since we have already imputed all themissing values with the logical approach that we have imputed for all of the variable separately usinga same logic , right . for example for a numerical variable we have imputed with the mean or median ,and for all categorical variables we have imputed with a model value . so , this can be the case whereyou have only missing values in to columns . what will you do whenever you have missing valuesin multiple columns like to ? in that case there can be a simple function which will do theimputation in one shot we are going to use that .. so , to fill the missing values that isnan values in both numerical and categorical variables at one shot we are going to use a lambdafunction . apply functions can be used whenever you want to perform any operations column wise orrow wise , it can be used any other cases but here , this apply function will be used across columns .and if you see here , i am not using the cars data because the cars data does not have anymissing values now , since we have already replaced everything . if you can recall , i have createdanother copy from the cars data while reading itself . in that case the cars data is still have missingvalues , because we have not touch this data at all . so , i am using that data set and i am using andapply function , so that whatever function that i am giving inside the apply function that will beapplied across all the columns . and the function that i am using inside the apply function is alambda function lambda function is an anonymous function and a powerful function whenever youuse it inside a function . and here i am using it inside an apply function and i am defining a functioncall x , and i am using a predefined function called fillna to apply it across all the columns . so , what itbasically does means ? fillna we know that , wherever there are missing values it will replaced withthe given value that we are giving it inside the function . so , what value that we are giving here ? weare not giving a value , rather we are giving conditions to it we are giving if else conditions , likebasically our target is to fill in all the missing values of numerical variable with mean , and to fill inall the missing values of categorical variable with mode . in that case , give a condition saying thatcalculate the mean of each and every variable , if the various data type is a float else calculate themode value of each and every variable and then use that value to replace with . so , that is what thefunction does . so , using this function we have just replaced all the missing values at one shotwherever there are missing values in numerical variable everything has been replaced with the meanvalue of each and every variable . and similarly wherever there are missing values under anycategorical variable , for each and every categorical variable separately the model value will becalculated and then that will be used for filling those missing values . so , once we do that , let uscheck for missing data after filling all the values . so , i am checking whether there are any missingvalues under the data frame cars data . the output is also shown here , if you see all the values arehere because we have already imputed all the missing values that is why you are seeing all zeroshere . so , now we do not have any missing values under any variable but as i mention this is not theonly way that you can go ahead with the imputing with missing values . there are several approachesthat are available to impute all the missing values , the way that we have shown here is the simplestof all by just imputing it with mean or the model value .. let us summarize whatever we seen tillhere we have seen how to identify the missing values , you also seen how you can identify thepattern of your missing values by subsetting all the rows and seeing whether one row has only onecolumn value missing or multiple columns are missing and then by arriving at a decision that themissing values are there randomly under each column then we found out an approach to fill in allthe missing values . we have seen two approaches that is mean or median imputation and modeimputation mean or median imputation is only for a numerical variable and you use modeimputation for a categorical variable . thank you .in the previous lecture we havebeen looking about how to create basic plots using matplotlib library . the basic plots include scatterplot , histogram and bar plot . in that lecture we have seen how to create these plots and we have alsoseen what matplot library is about and how to interpret each of these plots .and inthis lecture we are going to see how to create basic plots using seaborn library and the basic plotsincludes scatter plot , histogram , bar plot , box and whiskers plot and pair wise plots . we will see indetail about the creation of these plots and how to interpret them .so , first let ussee what seaborn library is about seaborn library is a python data visualization library which wasbuilt on top of matplotlib library that provides a high level interface for drawing attractive andinformative statistical graphs . so , using seaborn library we are going to first see how to create thisscatter plot .so , before creating the scatter plots we need to import the basic librariesthat are needed for visualization . so , let us import the necessary libraries . we are importing thepandas with aliase pd because to do the visualization we need to have a data frame , here we aregoing to create plots using a data frame . since we are going to deal with data frames we areimporting the pandas library , if you if we want to if we wanted to do some numerical operations on itthen we need a numpy library . so , let us import the numpy as np as well , then we can import thelibraries that are needed for visualization . here even though we are going to create plots using theseaborn library we are also importing the pyplot from mat plot library with the alias plt because aswe know that seaborn library has been built on top of the matplotlib library . we will be using someof the functionalities that are from the matplotlib library in that case we would be needing thatlibrary . so , let us import matplotlib as well followed by that we can import the seaborn library as sns .here sns will be realized for the seaborn library and matplotlib and seaborn will be used for datavisualization .so , now we have imported the necessary libraries into spyder . now , itstime to import the data that will be used for the visualization because , as we know we dovisualization to understand the data even more better . so , on that note we are going to import a datainto spyder to understand the data visually . so , we are going to import the toyota data which wehave already worked on since it is of csv format i have used pd.read csv and while reading itself ihave considered all the missing values as the default nan values and i have ceded to an object callscars data , now cars data is a dataframe . when we looked at the size of the dataframe through thevariable explorer you can see that it has observations with columns and now we are veryfamiliar with what toyota data is about . they are just the details of the cars . so , since our objectiveis to understand the data pictorially or visually , we need to consider only the rows wherever therecords are filled because we would not be able to interpret anything from the question marks orfrom the nan values . in this case our objective is to basically understand the data and understand therelationship that exists between each of the variables . in that case we wanted to remove missingvalues , so that we will focus on understanding the data which have complete informations from thedataframe . so , on that note we can just remove all the missing values from the dataframe and thenproceed with the visualization . so , let us remove the missing values from the dataframe by usingthe command dropna and inside the function you can just say axis is equal to . so , that all the rowswill be removed wherever there are nan values and if you use inplace is equal to true you are makingall the modifications in the data frame that is being used here . otherwise you have to reassign it to anew data frame called cars data or you can update it in the existing data frame itself . so , here ihave updated while i am using the function itself by using in place is equal to true and after droppingall the missing values if you look at the size of the data frame it is turned out to be observationswith columns on the whole we have removed around observations from the dataframe andwe are going to proceed with the analysis only with the observations with columns .so , now let us see how to create the scatter plot . so , here we are going to create a scatter plot ofprice verses age and that will be built using the default arguments . so , if you see the first line i havegiven as sns.set that means , that we are giving a theme to the background of the plot , the themewas being dark grid that means , that you will have a dark shade as a background of your plot andyou will as well have a grid . so , you can basically set themes to your background and dark grid is apreset seaborn team you can as well set themes that are available from the seaborn package and youcan set that under the style argument and even by default if you use sns.set it will give you a darkgrid theme . so , in order to do a scatter plot the function to be used from the c bond library isregplot regplot stands for regression plot and inside the function you have to specify the variablesfor x axis and the y axis . since it is going to be the scatter plot of price versus age we need to giveage under the x axis and price under the y axis we are going to check how price varies with respectto the age of the cars . so , here if you see i have accessed the age variable from the data framecars data similarly i have accessed the price variable from the cars data . so , this would be theoutput that you will be getting by setting the style as dark grid and by giving x as age and y as price .and if you see here as the age increases the price decreases and age that we see here is not in termsof years , but it is in terms of months . so , represents the cars ages around . years andrepresents the cars ages around . years . so , in that case most of the cars or the price is really lowwhenever the cars age is beyond years and the price is really high for the new aged car becausethe car has travelled a lot there could be more damage to it and since it is not new the price is alsocoming down . so , it is very obvious from the logic perspective as well as from the data perspective asage increases the price automatically decreases . and if you also see there is a regressions line whichis plotted over the scatter points that is because by default fit reg is equal to drew in regplotfunction . what it does mean it basically estimates the coefficient of x and then plots a regressionline over the points that is why the function is named as regression plot and if you do not want toconsider this regression fit line into your scatter plot if you just want to scatter plot of any twovariables you can also do that .like here we are going to do a scatter plot of priceversus age without the regression fit line that is very easy you can retain the same command as theprevious slide , but you just need to add another parameter called fit reg and you can just set themto false . because as i mentioned earlier by default it is true that is where you got a regression lineover those scattered points , but if you said they are as false you would not be getting the regressionline rather you will just get a scatter plot of price versus age . so , and here if you see the plot age iscalled as the label to the x axis and price is called as the label to the y axis . here we have notspecified any labels to x and y axis it is already being shown here that is how because it takes thelabel from the variable name that we have already given here . and the values , , , are thevalues from the variable age and from the plotting context these are called x tick labels and , ,, and so on are called as y tick labels that is on the y axis the boxes are called as grids and thepoints the scatter points are called as markers . here we have a solid round points .so , now we are going to see how to create a scatter plot of price versus age by customizing theappearance of the markers . appearance of the markers in the sense you can change the shape ofyour markers to differentiate between the categories , but here i have just taken only the scatter plotof price versus age . so , i am going to change all the markers into a different shape . so , in that case ican do that using the argument called marker and inside the marker argument you can specify thetype of marker you wanted to have it in your scatter plot . here have since i have given the asterisksall the scatter points will be marked as stars this will be very useful whenever you want todifferentiate the points with respect to different categories that are available under a variable . otherthan that all the codes remains the same i have just added marker is equal to star that should begiven under the single or double code .so , in this example we are going to create ascatter plot of price versus age by fueltype by fueltype in the sense we are going to add one morevariable into the scatter plot that is the variable fueltype . why are we going to add that ? because itis of interest to check the relationship between price with age by adding another variable fueltype ,like how price various when the age increases with respect to different fueltypes of the car . so , thatcan be added by using the parameter called hue and including another variable to show the fuel typecategories with different colors . here we are going to add fuel type under the argument orparameter called hue and we are going to represent the fuel type with respect to different colors . so ,here we are going to do that by using the command called lmplot that is from the seaborn librarylmplot is a function which combines regression plot and face . it grid it is very useful whenever youwant to plot a scatter plot by doing conditional subsets of data or by including another variable intothe picture in that case a lmplot will be very useful . and here the x axis is age variable and the y axisis the price variable and the data from which we are going to axises the cars data and i have alsosaid false different fit reg . so , that we do not get a regression fit over the scatter points and here iam adding one more variable into the scatter plot using the hue parameter and since we are going toadd one more variable points are going to be differentiated using colors based on the fuel type ofthe car in that case we need to know which colour represents what category in that case i need tohave legends as well . so , i have set legends as true and you can also set color palettes using thedifferent color palettes that are available in the seaborn library one of it is called set . so , i have justused set as the color palette to color the data points based on the fueltype . so , this is what theinput is about .let us see what is the output that we are getting . so , this is a scatterplot of price versus age by fueltype , it is the same scatter plot , but here we have just differentiatedthe data points using the categories that are available under the fueltype . but we have justdifferentiated the data points based on the fueltype categories . so , the red represents diesel and theblue represents patrol and the greens are cng . so , if you see here there are more data points orthere are more cars that are off petrol fuel type and the price is really higher for the cars which hasdiesel fuel type and the price is comparatively lower for the cars which have cng fuel type . and youcan also check the relationship between price and age as we know that whenever the cars age is highthe price is very low whenever the cars age is low the price will be high . similarly you can alsocustom the appearance of the markers using transparency , shape and size . like how wedifferentiated the points using colors here different levels of transparency to the points torepresent the categories you can also do the same thing by giving different shapes and by givingdifferent sizes for data points . so , this will help you include more variables into a single plot or youwill be able to understand the data quickly rather by looking at the numbers .so , nextwe are going to look at a plot called histogram . so , we are going to plot a histogram with defaultkernel density estimate because using the seaborn library by default it gives you a histogram with thekernel density estimate . so , the command that needs to be used this dist plot that is therepresentative of distribution plot . since that is from the seaborn library of used sns.distplot aninput should be any numerical variable for any continuous variable because histogram can be plottedto check the frequency distribution of any continuous variable . in that case age is one of thecontinuous variables from the data frame , here we are interested in looking at the frequencydistribution of age how the values are distributed under the age variable in that case you can use oryou can axis the age variable from the data frame cars data . so , this is being the representative ofthe x axis and as you know by default it gives you the kernel density estimate . it gives you work curveover the bars which is the representation of the distribution of the variable age and on the y axis youhave the kernel density estimate , but if your interest is to get the frequency distribution in terms ofcounts or numbers , then you can also get rid of the kernel density estimate and then have the countson your y axis .let us see how to get that . so , here we are going to plot histogramwithout the kernel density estimate you can do that by setting kde is equal to false . so , if you givethat the output would be similar to this on the y axis it is just a representation of frequencies or thecounts on the x axis you have the range of values from the age variable . and you have too manyintervals here it is very difficult to interpret from this plot the range is about to , where the carsage is more than years the count is really high . and there are very few cars which are new that iswhat we can interpret because there are two extremes here one is really high and one is really low .so , in that case you can also have a control on how many number of bins you want to have on theplot . so , that by having the control on the bins you will be able to quickly interpret from thedistribution of your age variable , let us see how to fix the number of bins .so , herewe are going to plot the histogram with fixed number of bins . so , retain the same codes as in aprevious slide you can just add bins is equal to . so , that you will have only bins in your histogram .bins are nothing but the range or the intervals . so , from this plot by having the number of bins as .it is very clear that the frequency is really high for the bin value to that means , that whereverthe cars age is above years , the frequency is high . because most of the cars detail is about the carswhose age is about to months , but you have only very few cars which are very new in our dataframe that is why the frequency is very low in the range between to months .so ,next we are going to look at the bar plot . so , bar plot is basically to check the frequency distributionof any categorical variable , here fueltype is one of the categorical variable in our data frame . so , letus look at the frequency distribution of the fuel type of the cars . so , to create a bar plot countplot isthe function that needs to be used under the function you just need to give the variable of interestthat is fueltype and you can also specify from which data frame that you are accessing it from , it iscars data . so , it is straightforward you will get the output , you are getting the fuel type on your xaxis at the count on your y axis and the bars are the representative for the counts with respect toeach fueltype . so , it is very evident from the plot that most of the cars have the fueltype as petroland there are very few cars whose fueltype are diesel or cng . so , now , we have seen how to createthe bar plot .so , here we are going to see how to create group bar plot . we are goingto create the group bar plot of fueltype and automatic , we mean by group bar plot . so , here we aregoing to have the bar plot of fueltype by adding another variable as automatic . so , we are going tolook at the frequency distribution of the fueltype of the car along with the interpretation whetherthe cars gearbox is of automatic or manual . so , let us see how to do that we can use the samefunction as bar plot that is count plot and you can specify the fueltype under the argument x andyou can also specify the data frame . so , that it knows from which it should axis the fueltype fromand by adding hue is equal to automatic we are including one more variable into the bar plot . so ,that the we are checking the relationship between the fueltype and automatic . so , let us see whatwould be the output . so , here is the output on the x axis you have the fueltype you have differentfuel types like diesel , petrol and cng and on the y axis you have the count . if you see the legend hereit has two value s and s and the s are the representative of manual gearbox and the s are therepresentative of automatic gearbox . so , if you see here there are only automatic gearbox typeswhose fuel type is of petrol and there are no cars available with automatic gearbox when the fueltype is about when the fuel types are diesel or cng . if you recall this is just the visual representationof the crosstab output that we have seen earlier in the lectures . so , we have used the crosstabfunction to arrive at the relationship between the automatic on the fueltype where we have seenthat in terms of numbers and we have tried to interpret that , but here using visualization we aregoing to interpret the same thing , but visually .so , next we are going to look at boxand whiskers plot we are going to look at is box and whisker plot for numerical variable for if youhave a numerical variable in your data frame and if you want to interpret more from the variable ,then you can go for box plot . because the box plot will give you the visual representation of the . thefive number summary includes mean , median the five number summary includes minimummaximum and the three quantiles the those are first quantiles , second quantile and third quantile .so , let us see what the quantiles are and what the minimum and maximum values are . so , how dowe do that ? we can create a box plot using the command box plot that is from the seaborn libraryand since we are interested in getting five number summary of the price variable i have accessed theprice variable from cars data and i have given that under the argument called y. so , that the y will bethe representation of price , but if you give it under x the x will be the representation of price . so ,now , let us see how the output will look like . so , as i mentioned since we have given price under theargument y we are getting the price value on the x axis . so , now , let us try to interpret the box plot itis called as box and whiskers plot because it has some box as well as the whiskers to it the horizontallines are called as the whiskers , now let us try it interpret this . this horizontal line is called as thelower whisker or also the representation of the minimum value which is excluding the outliers . if youhave outliers in your data which are nothing , but the extreme values then it excludes that values andthen gives you the picture of what is the minimum value of the price . the minimum value of theprice of the car is about euros and the upper whiskers which represents the maximum valuethat is excluding the outliers . so , the maximum value of the cars is around to thousand byexcluding the outlier or the extreme values and these are called low whisker and the upper whisker .the lowest horizontal line of the box represents the first quantile that is percentage of the carsprice is less than and the middle line represents the second quartile which is nothing , but themedian . that means , that percentage of the data is less than , euros . and the upperhorizontal line is nothing , but third quantile that is q which represents that percentage of theprice of the car is less than around , euros this is called q , q and q . and whatever thepoints that are lying above the whiskers are called as outliers and you can also have the values belowthe whiskers as well . if you have points about the upper whisker then you can say that these areoutliers or the extreme values where the values are really more than the . times of your q . this iswhat the q values about . the q is around , so these values are . times of q that is why itis called as extreme values , it is not in between the range of the price that is why it is called as theextreme values . similarly you can ask what happens when you have some values above the lowerwhiskers in that case those are also called as outliers or extreme values because those values will beless than the . times of q . so , using box plot you will be able to visually look at the distribution ofthe price variable and what would be the median value and what are the quantile values of the price .and using the box plot the main key point to the box plot is you will be easily able to identify theoutliers of any numerical variable . so , this is how we create a box plot and this is how we interpretthe box plot as well .so , now we are going to look at the box and whisker plot fornumerical with this categorical variable because box and whisker plot is very useful when you wantto check the relationship between one numerical and one categorical variable , like how the pricevaries with respect to the another variable . because in the previous example we have just looked atthe distribution and how do we detect the outliers using the box plot . here we are going to checkthe relationship between two variables in that case you can use box plot you can use box plot whenyou have one numerical and one categorical variable here we are going to look at the price of thecars for varies fuel types of the cars . so , you can use the same command as in the previous slide thatis box plot and under the x argument i have given fueltype and another y argument i have given thevariable as price . so , you have fueltype on your x axis and you have price on your y axis and bylooking and the plot it is very evident that the price varies with respect to different fueltypes of thecars . and as we know that the middle line is the representation of the median if you look at themiddle lines of the different fueltypes of the cars , the median price of the car is really high when thefueltype of the car is petrol . and the median value is really low when the fueltype is of either dieselor cng . it is very evident that the on an average the petrol fueltype has the highest price among thecars from the data set that we have and you can also see the maximum value of the maximumprice of the car is for the diesel fueltype and the minimum value of the car is also for the dieselfueltype . so , these are the interpretation that you can make here and you can see there are someextreme values that are above the upper whiskers of the diesel and petrol fueltype and those arecalled as the extreme values . because very few observations are there and those are about the .times of your third quantile that is , euros . so , now , we have checked the relationship betweenfueltype and the price .so , now we are going to look at the group box and whiskersplot . here we are going to look at the group box and whiskers plot of prices versus fueltypebyincluding one more variable called automatic . so , let us see how to do that . the codes remains thesame whenever you want to have a grouped box plot you just need to add that variable including theargument called hue and i have added automatic under hue . so , we will have a group box andwhiskers plot , let us see what the output is about . so , here you have the same box plot as theprevious slide , but you have another boxes which is corresponding to the different fueltypes and youhave another boxes which are the representation of the automatic variable . here if you see theautomatic variable is being included here and the s are the representative of manual gearbox andthe s are the representative of automatic gearbox and those are represented by blue and green incolor respectively . so , here whenever the cars fuel type is petrol and the gearbox type is alsoautomatic there are no cars that are available for the automatic gearbox when the fueltype is ofeither diesel or cng , that is very evident from any of the plots that we have seen in the previousslides as well .till now we have been looking at having only one plot in a window , wecan also have multiple plots in a window , here we are going to look at the box and whisker plot andthe histogram on the single window . so , let us plot box whisker plot and histogram on the samewindow . so , in order to do that we have to first split the windows into two parts . what do we meanby splitting the window is into two parts ? this is what we mean . so , this is a single window i havejust splitted the window into . so , that i can plot two plots in the same window and it will be easierfor me to interpret from the two plots instead of creating different plots for the same variable i canas well do that in the same window itself . so , here if you see there is only small space for the upperpart and there is a large space for the lower part that is how because i have said the aspect ratio withjust because i have said the aspect ratio accordingly . let us see how to split the window with givinglet us see how to split the window plotting window and we will also see how to customize the aspectratio . so , subplots is a function that is used to create the subplots and by giving you mean that youneed to have rows . so , you want to split your window into parts in row wise and by givingspecification of grids using grid spec kw you can set the ratios of your height i have given . and. . so , that there is a larger space for the second window and there is a less space for the firstwindow . i have just splitted my window into and given the aspect ratio and i have saved thatoutput to a and i have saved that output to two variables called f and axis box plot and axis forhistogram because these are going to be same for both the box plot and the histogram . combinelyhave saved it to two objects and i have also saved it to a figure . so , ax box represents the axis for boxplot and ax hist represents the axis for the histogram .so , let us now we can add orcreate two plots . so , the codes remains the same because for creating the box plot you have to use abox plot and the variable of interest is price and using the axis ax box . and we have also created thehistogram using the dist plot function , where we have specified the variable as price and were wehave also specified what is the axis for that that is using the same axis that is ax hist . and we wantedjust the histogram with not the kernel density estimate so that is why we have set kb is equal tofalse . so , let us see how the output will look like . so , this is the output for the first command usingthe boxplot you are getting the boxplot for the variable price as well as you are getting the histogramfor the variable price . so , here this is the histogram of price as well as the boxplot . so , you will beable to look at the frequency distribution of any continuous variable as well as the five number aswell as you will be able to look at the visual representation of five number summary of it . if youwant to look how the outliers are present in a variable and what is the minimum and maximum valueof a variable . so , all these information can be get using a single plot when you create plots usingsubplots .so , now we will see how to create pairwise plots pairwise plots are used toplot pairwise relationships in the data and basically creates the scatter plots for joint relationshipsand histograms for univariate relationships you will understand what do we mean by jointrelationships and univariate relationship when we look at the output of it . so , to create the pairwiseplot the command that is used this pair plot that is also from the seaborn library and you can alsospecify the data frame because on the whole we are going to look at the relationship between all thevariables considering all the variables . and the kind of plot that we are going to plot for anynumerical variable is scatter and we are going to colour the data points using another variable calledfueltype .so , now let us look at the output of the plot . so , this would be the outputof your pairwise plot you basically have the all possible relationship using all the variables . so , thefirst plot is like the distribution of the price because on the x axis you have price and on the y axisalso you have the price variable . so , this is called as joint relationship whenever you have samevariable on both x and y axis , then you call it as joint relationship in that case you will just have thehistogram of it like to indicate the frequency distribution of the variable price . but here the next plotif you see the y axis is price and if you look at the x axis it is age . so , this is actually so when youmove from left to right whatever you have in your x axis represent is the representative of the x axisand whatever you have it in your y axis is the y axis variable . so , this is the scatter plot of price versusage , it is very evident that as the age increases the price decreases and all the colours are therepresentative of various fuel types of the cars . so , similarly you will be able to interpret it for theother variables relationship and if you see all the diagonal boxes are histograms because all thediagonals values represents all the diagonal boxes represent the univariate distribution because thisis just the distribution of the variable age and this is just the distribution of the variable kilometerand the distribution of the variable is hp is being represented here . so , the pairwise plot is used toget the plots for all possible combination of variables and you will be able to look at in terms ofscatter plot and histogram . this would give you an easier way to understand the relationship thatexists between different pairs of variables . you can also see there is a legend which is shown here forthe fuel type like how the markers have been colored .so , now we have come to theend of the session , let us summarize whatever we have learned till here . so , we have learned how tocreate the basic plots using the seaborn library the first thing that we have seen is how to createscatter plot and then we have seen how to create histogram using the seaborn library . and we havealso looked at how to create simple bar plot and then we have seen how to create grouped bar plot .followed by that we have seen how to create box and whiskers plot and also , we have seen how tocreate group box and whiskers plot . at last we have seen how to create the pairwise plot from theseaborn library which was very useful to look at the relationship of all the variables in a singlewindow . thank you .lecture data visualization part ihello all welcome tothe lecture on the module data visualization . so , in this lecture , we are going to do datavisualization , where we are going to learn how to create basic plots using the matplotlib library . thebasic plots include scatter plot , histogram and bar plot .so , now let us see what data visualizationis about data visualization , allows us to quickly interpret the data and adjust different variables to seetheir effect . what do we mean by quickly interpreting the data , because if we were to understandthe data using numbers , then it would be difficult for us to understand the data and quickly interpretthe data . but if we were to understand through graphical representation of data , it would make us itwould make the work easier in terms of interpretation and in terms of understanding . if you seehere the technology is also increasingly making it easier for us to do so because there are so manyvisualization techniques tools that are available to do visualization to understand the data even morebetter than interpreting from the numbers . but why do we need to visualize the data ? we canobserve the patterns . you can also identify the extreme values that could be anomalies . and if youwant to interpret the data easily , then you have to go for visualization . so , these are the importantpoints to visualize the data .so , python offers multiple graphing libraries that offersdiverse features , we are going to look at few graphing libraries that are available in python . and whatis the need , first one is matplotlib which is used to create d graphs and plots . and i have mark it asgreen because we are going to look at matplotlib library in this lecture . the next one is pandasvisualization which has easy to use interface and that was built on top of matplotlib . the next one isseaborn it provides a high level interface for drawing interactive and informative statistical graphicsand that was also built on top of matplotlib , whatever graph and plots that you are creating usingseaborn library can also be created using matplotlib library . and you can also have a control on whatinsights you can get of your plot using seaborn . the next one is ggplot ggplot is used whenever youwant to do advanced graphics , and this ggplot is entirely based on r s ggplot , r s anotherprogramming language that is used for analytics . and it has a package called ggplot which is entirelydedicated for doing visualization . and in python we have ggplot that is based on r s ggplot , and itbasically uses grammars of graphics the next is plotly . if you want to create interactive plots , then youcan go for plotly . but in this course we are going to look at two graphing libraries that are matplotliband seaborn .first we are going to look at a matplot library . so , let us see what matplot library is about . matplot library is a d plotting library which produces good quality figures .although it has its origin in emulating the matlab graphic commands it is independent of matlab .it makes heavy use of numpy another extension code to provide good performance even for largearrays . so , this is the overview of the matplotlib library .so , under thematplotlib library we are going to look at a plot called scatter plot . so , let us see what is a scatter plotfirst . a scatter plot is basically a set of points that represents the values that obtained for twodifferent variables plotted on a horizontal and vertical axis . so , if you look at a scatter plot , you willhave to access to it x and y. and the points from the data frame will be scattered all over the place ofthe plot or in a separate pattern . and using that and using the variables that you have given as aninput , you will get the relationship out of it . and there can be a question when to use those scatterplots . so , basically the scatter plots are use to convey the relationship between any two numericalvariables , how one variable vary with respect to the other variable . and scatter plots are alsosometimes called as correlation plots , because they show how two variables are correlated , whetherthey are negatively correlated or positively correlated , all these information you can get that bylooking at the patterns of your scatter plots .so , now we are going to import the datainto spyder to do a scatter plot . prior to importing the data we have to import the necessarylibraries . the first library is pandas and we have imported it with the as pd and we have to import thepandas library to work with data frames . and then we will also be doing some numerical operationson it . so , we need to import numpy as np . and then since we are going to use the matplotlib library ,and we have to import pyplot from the matplotlib as plt . and we use this to do visualization .now , we can import this data into spyder using the read csv command . and we have said the firstcolumn as the index column , and we have considered all the question marks as default nan values , sothat we can do any operations that are related to nan values . so , cars data is your data frame nowand the size of it is with columns . we are going to remove all the missing values from thedata frame , because we are going to visualize the data . in that case i do not want to consider all themissing values rather i just want to consider all the rows where there are no missing values . so , inthat case , if you want to drop out all the records where there are missing values , then you can usethe command called dropna preceded with the data framing . and inside the function if you set axis isequal to , then you consider all the rows where there are missing values and remove that . and ihave also given in place is equal to true that is because i have not assigned this to a new data frameas cars data to or are in the existing data frame rather i have just used in place is equal to true mysetting inplace is equal to true , the modifications that you are making here will be reflected in thedata . if you do not give this , the records will not be dropped from your data frame . if you look at thesize of your data frame after removing the missing values , it turned out to be havingobservations with columns . so , we have left out around observations .so ,now let us see how to create a scatter plot . so , for creating a scatter plot , scatter is the function sincewe are doing it from the matplotlib library . we have saved pyplot as plt , so that is why i have usedthe allies called plt to access the function scatter . and inside the function i have given the xcoordinate variable that is age and i have also given the y coordinate variable that is price . so , it isvery evident that we are going to check the relationship between age and price through scatter plot .and the next thing is i have given red under the parameter c that means that i am going to color themarkers using the red color . so , we will see what markers when we get the output . this line willproduce a scatter plot . but if you want to add title to your plot and if you want to add labels to yourx axis and y axis , you can also give that . see if you want to add title to your plot , you can give it asplt.title . and inside that i have just given it a scatter plot of prices age of the cars . and the x labelrepresents the age which are in months , and the y axis represents the price which are euros . now ,we have created a scatter plot to show the scatter plot you have to use plt.show . even if you selectthe lines to plt.y label , you will be able to show the plot . since this is a standardized code , wheneveryou are building your plots layer by layer by giving the type of plot first and then giving titles afterthat , then you have to run everything in one shot to plot.show to get all the information in a singleplot .so , now let us see what is the output by using the scatter function . he re this isthe scatter plot to show the relationship between price of the car and the age of the car . so , if yousee from the output , your x axis represents the age and y axis represents the price if you see here ,as the age increases the price decreases . the points that are shown here are called as markers . andthe vertical line that is shown here are ticks , and the , , are called tick labels . since these arean x axis , these are called xticks and x labels , and these lines are called yticks and these values arecalled ytick labels .so , now we are going to see how to create the histogram . before creating weneed to know what histogram is . so , what is a histogram ? it is a graphical representation of datausing bars of different heights . so , whenever you have a numerical variable , and if you want to checkthe frequency distribution of the variables , you can go for histogram , so that the each bar will giveyou different heights that represents the frequencies . and histograms groups numbers in tworanges , because on the x axis you will have intervals or ranges that can also be called as bins . and foreach of the bins , you will get a corresponding frequency by looking at the height of each bars . so ,when to use the histogram ? as i mentioned to represent the frequency distribution of any numericalvariables you can look for histogram .now , we will see how to create a histogramusing matplotlib . so , the command is hist that stands for histogram , and that is from the librarycalled pyplot library called matplotlib , and pyplot is the sub library that is available under mat plotand plt is just analyzed to the pyplot . and inside the function , i was just given kilometer from thecars data , data frame . so , that becomes the x axis . so , we are creating a histogram with the defaultarguments , because we have just given the x variable alone . and let us look at the output . so , here isthe histogram with default arguments on the x axis you have the bins . the first bin is from to, , and the second bin is from to lakh , and the third bin is from to. for example , using this histogram i am not able to get the exact bin range or the exactrange the corresponding frequency , because it does not give me the separation between each bars .so , now , what i can do here is i can create a histogram by specifying the edge color and the numberof bins i have . if i have too many bins , then it would not be able to easier for us to understand thefrequencies for each interval , in that case you can specify or fix the number of bins as well . so , herewe are using the same command , where we have fixed the x coordinate that is kilo meter . since weare looking at the frequency distribution of the kilometer of the car and the color for the bars will begreen , and the edge color of the bars i am giving it as white , so that there is a clear demarcationbetween two bars , and i have fixed the number of bins as . and you can also add title xlabel and theylabel to your plot here the title for the plot is histogram of kilo meter and the xlabel is kilometer andthe ylabel is frequency . and if you give plt.show and if you run from plt.hist to plt.show , you will get ahistogram with those specified number of bins .so , here is the output that we getfrom the previous code . so , here we are looking at the frequency distribution of kilometer of thecars . and it shows that most of the cars have traveled between to kilometer and thereare only few cars with more distance travelled . now , if you see that there is a clear demarcationbetween each of the bus , and you will be able to look at the frequencies of it easily .next we are going to look at a bar plot . let us see what is a bar plot . bar pot is a plot that representscategorical data with rectangular bars . whenever you have a categorical data , and if you want tolook at the frequencies of each categories in a variable , then we will look at in terms of a bar plot .bar pot is also similar to histogram , there would not be any space in between the bars for thishistogram , because you are looking at in terms of continuous range . but here you will be looking atin terms of frequencies of categories , so you will have space in between the bars that is what thedifference between the bar and the histogram . and you use bar plot for a categorical variable and weuse histogram for a numerical variable . and those length of the bar is basically depicts thefrequencies of each categories . and when to use a bar plot to represent the frequency distributionof any categorical variables , and the bar diagram makes it easier to compare sets of data betweendifferent groups . if you have a free categorical variable and if you have so many categories that underthat variable if you want to look at distribution of each variable or how each category is distributed ,then bar diagram is easier to interpret more on the categories of a variable .now , letus see how to create a bar plot , basically you have to have an array which shows the counts of eachcategories . and the next object or the next variable represents a fueltype here we have petrol dieseland cng as fueltypes of the cars . and since we know that apriori have just given otherwise you canalso give value counts as an input , because that will have the category as well as the frequencies .and i have given index because on the x axis , it should know the index the index is whatever is thelength of fueltype what is the length of the fueltype it would be . so , the range would be , and .and to create a bar plot.bar is the function that is from the pyplot sub library and inside thefunction , you just basically need to give what should be there in the x axis and what should be therein the y axis . and x axis i want the index to be present , and on the y axis i want the counts to bepresent . and i am going to color my bars differently red will go for petrol and diesel will be coloredbased on blue color and cng will be colored based on cyan color . and i have also given the title andthe labels for x and y axis , so that i can create a bar plot which will show the frequencies of thefueltype categories . and as i have mentioned earlier index is nothing but x coordinate and count willrepresent the height of the bar , at height of the bars have been represented using counts .so , this is the output that we got . but if you see on the x axis , you have only the range . here we arenot able to find out which is petrol which is diesel or which is cng , in that case you can also specifythe labels to your x axis by giving xticks . so , all the other codes reminds the same , but since i justwant to add labels to each of the bars on the x axis that can be given using xticks you can set thelabels of the xsticks using fueltype , because you have already assigned the variable called fueltypewith some string values , so that will be labels for the xticks . you can also set the location for x tickswhere petrol should be present and diesel should be present and cng should be present . and i havegiven rotation is equal to , so that all the labels will be degree rotation . so , now let us see howthe plot will look like . here if you see this the first bar is corresponding to the petrol fueltype and it isvery evident that most of the cars around are and odd cars have the fueltype as petrol , andthere are only few cars for which the fueltype is about diesel and cng .now , we havecome to the end of the session . in this lecture , we have learned how to create basic plots usingmatplotlib library . those basic plots were scatter plot , histogram and bar plot . thank you .lecture exploratory data analysis welcome to the lecture on exploratory data analysis .so , in this lecture we are going to explore more on the data that we were working on using frequencytables two way tables . followed by that , we are also going to look at how to get the joint probabilityout of two way tables . we will also be looking at how to get marginal probability and conditionalprobability using two way tables . so , we will see in detail about each of the topic listed here . at lastwe are also going to look at a measure called correlation because , all of the points which are listedabove are to interpret or to check the relationship between categorical variables . but we will alsohave numerical variables in our data frame , in which case we will also be looking at . so , in that case ifyou want to check the relationship between two numerical variables , there is a measure calledcorrelation that is what we are going to see in this lecture . we will also be seeing in detail aboutwhat correlation measure is about .so , before exploring on the data , we need toimport the data into spyder to work on that . so , prior to importing data , we need to import thenecessary libraries that are acquired for importing any data into spyder . so , let us do that first . firstwe are importing the os library we use os library to change the working directory . next we will alsobe working with data frames because once we read any data into spyder that becomes a data frame .so , to deal with data frames we need to load the library called pandas . and we have imported it aspd because pd is just analyzed to the library called pandas . so , now , we have imported the necessarylibraries to change the working directory using the command os.chdir . chdir chance for changingdirectory and inside the command you can just give the path from which you are going to access thedata from .now , let us import the data into spyder . so , we have a dataset calledtoyota.csv which are nothing but the details of the cars . the details of the cars having captured interms of various attributes like price , age , kilometre , fueltype you can look at the snipped belowhere . so , since this is csv data we need to use read csv command to read in csv files and that is fromthe panda s library . so , that is where we have used pd.read csv . and inside which we have just giventhe filename and we have set index col as just to make sure that we are setting the first column asour index column . since we have already worked with this toyota data , we know that there are somemissing values that are in the form of question marks . this question marks these question marksdoes not convey any message from the data or about the data . so , in that case we will beconsidering this as missing value , but here i have given it under na values because i am going toconsider these special strings with the default none values of python . because , python offers severalfunctions which will allow us to deal with the default nan values . in this case if i want to perform anyoperations by considering these missing values it will be a tedious process . rather i can just considerthese strings as default nan values which also the representation of not available values . whilereading itself , we are considering all the question marks as nan value . so , that we can perform allthe operations that are related to missing values and the snipped given below will give you an ideaabout how the data will look like . now we have read the data into spyder we are going to create acopy of the original data , so that whatever operations or modifications we are going to do on thedata frame will not be reflected in the same data set itself . rather we can just have a copy of it sothat we can cross verify with the original data at any point of analysis . so , in that case we are goingto create a copy using the dot copy function proceeded with the data frame name . so , herecars data is a data frame name and using .copy i am creating a copy of data and i am saving it into anew object called cars data . so , cars data two becomes my new data frame which was copiedfrom the original data frame . now we can use this data frame to do the further analysis or to dooperations so that the original data will not be modified .so , now we are going tolook how we are going to create a frequency table before creating we need to know what frequencytable is about . we have multiple variables in our data frame and if you want to understand the datamore , you basically want to check the relationship that exist between the variables . but we can notjust check the relationship between all the variables we can do one by one . for example , we cancheck the relationship between any categorical variables using cross tabulation or if you want to dounivariate analysis on a categorical variable you can also create a frequency table . so , that you willknow what is the frequency of each categories that are available under a variable . now , let us seehow to create a frequency table ? so , crosstab is the function that comes from the panda s library ,which is used to compute a simple cross tabulation using one two or more variables by default itcreates a frequency table of the factors . so , now , let us see how to create a frequency table . so , ihave used pd.crosstab that is the function that is used to create a frequency table . and as an inputto the function i have used it as index is equal to cars of fueltype that means , that i am interestedin getting the frequencies of the categories that are available under the variable fueltype . and weknow that that is from the data frame cars data and the variable of interest should be given underthe parameter called index . we also need to have the corresponding frequencies of it . so , basically itgive you the count for each categories of fueltype . and since we know that we have so many missingvalues in our data frame , we do not want to consider that while we are interpreting from thefrequency table . in that case you can drop all those missing values by setting dropna is equal to true .by setting that you will get rid of all the records wherever there are missing values . so , you will getthe frequencies for each categories for the records where there are no missing values . by settingdropna is equal to true , if you look at the original data size and the data size after dropping nanvalues you will get an idea about how many records we have lost . so , the original data size is aboutrows and after dropping the missing values we are left out with only rows because therewere records where the fueltype were missing that is why we are left out with onlyrecords . now , we are going to create the frequency table by considering only records . so , nowlet us see how the output would look like . so , if you see here you have the variable here and youhave the corresponding categories under the variable fueltype . so , basically there are threecategories under the variable fueltype , cng , petrol and diesel . and you can also look at thecorresponding frequencies of each of it . so , it is very evident from the output , there are only fifteencars whose fueltype is of cng . and there are records or cars have the fueltype as diesel .and if you see here petrol has the frequency as . so , in this case most of the cars have petroltype as fueltype because there are only few cars whose fueltype is are of cng and diesel . so , in thiscase you will have an idea about though there are so many categories that are available underfueltype most of the cars fueltype are of petrol .so , in the previous example wehave considered only one categorical variable just to get the frequency distribution of eachcategories . now we can also have one more variable to check the relationship between those twocategorical variables . if you want to check the relation between two categorical variables you can gofor two way tables . and here we are going to use the same function to create a two way table and inthis example we are going to look at the frequency distribution of gearbox types with respect todifference fueltypes of the car . in the previous example you have just looked at the frequencydistribution of fueltype , but here we are going to look at the frequency distribution of gearbox withrespect to the different fueltypes of the car . so , let us see how to do that and if you want to knowmore about gearbox types that are available for the data set that we have here is a snippet . so ,gearbox type have been represented using a variable called automatic , it has two values s and sand is the representation of the car having a manual gearbox and one is representation of the carhaving an automatic gearbox . now let us see how to create a two way table using crosstab function .so , the function remains the same that is pd.crosstab , the first parameter that goes into the functionis index under that i have just specified the variable as automatic . so , under the index variable i havespecified the variable as automatic and under the columns you can specify one more variable that isfueltype because we want to look at the frequency distribution of gearbox type with respect todifferent fueltypes of the car . and i am also going to remove all the missing values from the dataframe . so , by setting na is equal to true you mean that you it will consider the two way table will becreated by considering only the rows where both automatic and fueltype are found . that is thereshould be no missing values in both automatic and fueltype in that case only it will create afrequency table . because , if you have a missing value under a automatic column and if you have afield value under the fueltype column it will not be able to get the count of it . rather it will just overthat particular row itself and you will be left out with the rows where there are no missing values inboth automatic and fueltype column . so , now let us look at the output to check the relationshipbetween those two variables . so , since i have just since i have given automatic under the indexargument and fueltype under the columns argument the output is a representation where rowscorrespond to automatically and columns corresponds to fueltype . so , from the output it is veryevident that . so , now , let us see how to interpret the output . so , if you see here so , you can seethe . so , you can see the value here that means , that there are only records where thefueltypes of cng and the car has a manual gearbox . and there are only records where thefueltype of the car is diesel and also the car is having a manual gearbox . and interesting and theinteresting thing about output is you can see some s here that means , that the cars with automaticgearbox does not have the fueltype of either cng or diesel . if the car is of automatic gearbox then ithas only the fueltype as petrol . so , low cars have the fueltype as cng or diesel given the gearbox isof automatic . so , this is very interesting about the relationship between automatic and fueltype .so , now , this gives us the idea about what is the relationship that exist between the automatic andfueltype variables .so , we have looked at the output in terms of numbers . there isalso a way were you can convert the table values in terms of proportion and that is what we mean byjoint probability . by converting the table values from numbers to proportion you will get a jointprobability values you will get the joint probability values that is also using the same functioncrosstab . let see how to do that , we are going to use the same function crosstab to arrive at the jointprobability values . what do you mean by joint probability first ? joint probability is the likelihood oftwo events if joint probability is the likelihood of two independent events happening at the sametime . so , if you have two independent events happening at the same time what is the probability ofit , that is what the joint probability give you let see how to do that . the all the other quote remainsthe same , but you just need to add one more parameter called normalize is equal to true . if you setnormalize is equal to true you are basically converting all the table values from numbers toproportion that is what normalize means . now let us see how the output will look like . so , you havethe same table here , but the values have been converted from numbers two proportions . you caninterpret the output like , the joint probability of the car having a manual gearbox and having thefueltype of cng is only . . but if you look at a value here that is . that represents that the jointprobability of the car having a manual gearbox and the fueltype is also petrol the probability is reallyhigh there . and if you see here there is no probability that you will get a car with an automaticgearbox as well as with the fueltype cng or diesel , but all these are from the data that we have readnow . so , all these are interpretation that we have made are based on the data that we have now ,there can be cases where the interpretations can be different with respect to different sets ofrecords .now , we going to look at how to get the marginal probability using the twoway table . we are going to use a same function but by just tweaking or by just adding one moreparameters we will be able to arrive at different types of probability values . so , here we are going tolook at marginal probability . so , marginal probability is the probability of the occurrence of the singleevent , it will consider only the occurrence of a single event alone . so , here is the code for that , wehave used the same pd.crosstab function . so , here index and columns parameters remains the sameand we have used dropna is equal to true and normalize is equal to true because we want all thetable values in terms of proportions or the probability values . and i have also set margins is equal totrue in order to get the marginal probability value by setting margin is equal to true . you arebasically going to get the rows sums and the column sums for your table values . let us see how theoutput will look . so , here is the output in the previous example you would have got till here you didnot get the rows sum and the column sum of it . but by setting margins is equal to true you will getthe row sums and the columns as well in the name of all . what is we mean by marginal probabilitythe highlighted values are nothing , but the marginal probability values and how do interpret thesevalues . so , if you take the first value that is . . so , now , how can we interpret from the value. because the . value is nothing but the probability of cars having manual gearbox when thefueltype is of either cng or diesel or petrol . you can infer the . value as the probability of the carhaving a fueltype as petrol and when the gearbox type is of either automatic or manual . so , this iswhat you can get and if you sum up everything the total probability value will be .now let us move on to get the conditional probability using the two way table . so , here also we aregoing to use a same function that is panda s.crosstab and let us see what conditional probability isabout . so , conditional probability is the probability of an event a , given that another event b hasalready occurred . for example , if you want to get the probability of an event a by consideringanother event has already occurred then you call it as a conditional probability . and now what is theexample that we are going to look using conditional probability is that , given the type of gearboxwhat is the probability of different fueltype ? so , let us see how to get that , but if you see here thefirst four parameters remains the same , we have just tweaked the normalised parameter from wehave just tweaked the normalized parameter we have initially said that as true , but we have changingit to index just to get the conditional probability values . so , now we are going to look at the outputto get the inferences . so , if you see here this is a cross tabulation of automatic and fueltype variableand all the values are in terms of probability values . since we have set normalize is equal to indexyou will get the row sum as one because that is what we mean by the conditional probability . so ,given the gearbox types is of manual the probability of getting a cng fueltype is . and theprobability of getting diesel fueltype is . and the probability of getting fueltype as petrol is reallyhigh when compared to the other fueltypes . so , this gives you an idea about for any manual gearbox petrol can be the fueltype because at the max we are getting the probability is for petrol . so ,there is a really high probability value that you can get . so , from the high probability value you cansay that so , from high probability value of . you can say that for any car which are of manualgearbox the probability is really high for having a petrol type for having a fueltype as petrol . andsimilarly you can see here there is no property that you can get because there is no probability valuethat you can get for cng and diesel . because the probability is and the probability is for petrolbecause for all the automatic gearbox cars the fueltype is only petrol . this we know that from theprevious examples as well . so , this is how we get the conditional probability . here we have got therows sum to we can also get the column sum to in that case you will be looking at the cross tablein terms of given the type of fuel being used for the car . so , given the type of fuel , you will get theprobability of different gearbox types .so , let us see how to get that . so , we are goingto use a crosstab function to arrive at a conditional probability . so , i have initially set normalize isequal to index , but here i am changing it to column just to get the column sums as . but all otherparameters remains the same . now let us try interpret from the output . so , given though fueltypeof the car is cng what is a probability of the car having a manual gearbox ? it is . so , in this casethere is because we know that there is no automatic gearbox which are of cng or diesel fueltype .but the probability of getting a car given that the fueltype is petrol and the car has also manualgearbox is . . so , now we have seen how to get the conditional probability by considering the twovariables because , we have also set the normalized parameter as columns and we have also seenhow to set normalize is equal to index . and we have also seen how to interpret those results .next we are going to look at correlation because , till now we have been looking at to check therelationship between two categorical variables using cross tabulation . now , we are going to look athow to check the relationship between two numerical variables used the measure called correlation .and what is correlation ? correlation is just to check the strength of association between twonumerical variables and it need not be always numerical variables , but in this case or in this lecturewe are going to look at the correlation for numerical variables . we are going to look at a visualrepresentation of correlation using scatter plot . so , if you see here the first plot says positive trendbecause , as one variable increases the other variable is also increasing . for example , as your weightof the car increases the price might go up , in that case you call it is as a positive trend when you seethe points are scattered . in this case and there is another plot that you can see here is little or nocorrelation . because there is no pattern that you can find out from this scatter plot here rather allthe points have been scattered all over in that case you can say that there is no correlation betweenthose two variables at all . theoretically or numerically if you want to interpret from the correlationmeasure then the correlation values bounded between and . and closer to one in either ns isthe represent the higher correlation it can be either a negative or positive sign . because , thecorrelation can be there can be high correlation negatively and there can be high positively . if youwant to interpret from the correlation measured in terms of numbers then the correlation value willbe bounded between to . represents there is no correlation at all between any two numericalvariables . and closer to represents there is a strong correlation between two variables positively .theoretically , above . we can say there is a fair correlation between two numerical variables . ifyou can take it to the other side of it to then closer to will give you high negative correlationlike this whenever the age of the car increases the price will always decrease . because for the neweraged car the price will always be really high , in that case there can be a strong negative relationshipbetween those two variables so the value will be closer to . so , now we have got an idea aboutwhat correlation measures is about and how we can interpret visually and how we can interpretnumerically .so , now we are going to see how to get the correlation using python ,corr is the function that is used to calculate correlation between any variables that you can use thatfor a data frame . because , by using the.corr function we are going to compute the pairwisecorrelation of columns by excluding all the null values here . because , we are not just going toconsider only two variables rather we are going to consider all the variables at a time and thefunction computes the pairwise correlation . we will see what pairwise correlation is when we getthe output . but this function is used to get the pairwise correlation of columns and by default itexcludes all the missing values from the data frame and then it calculates the correlation value . andthe method i have specified here is pearson s because by default it calculates the pearsoncorrelation . and pearson correlation is also used for to check the strength of association betweentwo numerical variables . if you have ordinal variables then you can go for other measures as kendallrank correlation and spearman rank correlation . so , in that case we need to exclude the categoricalvariables to find the pearson correlation . now let us see how to exclude those variables which are ofcategorical data type . so , here cars data two is a data frame that i am working on from the dataframe i am going to select only the columns which are of numerical data type . since i am just goingto exclude only categorical variables i have given object under exclude . i have saved that to a newdata frame called numerical data . so , let us see what would be the dimension of it by checking whatis the number of variables that are available under numerical data if you see if you print and see theshape of it you can look you can see that there are observation with eight variables . initially wehad , we have we are left out with only variables now which are of numerical data type .so now , let us see how to create the correlation matrix . so , we are going to look at the correlationbetween the numerical variables using the command.corr . and the data frame that i am applying itto is the numerical data and i am saving this input to an output called corr matrix . now , we are goingto calculate the correlation from the data frame that we have now using the function.corr here theinterest is to find the correlation between the numerical variables . and the data frame that we areappling it here is numerical data because that is where we have all the columns as numbers . and weare also saving the output to an object called corr matrix so that will have the output of thecorrelation matrix . so , now , let us look at the output and try to interpret the correlation values . so ,this is a snippet that is taken from the variable explorer . and if you see here the index represents thevariable names the variables in separate columns . so , if you look at the principal diagonal which aremarked in purple all are of one . because the correlation between price and price would bebecause the relationship is being checked against that we rebuilt itself that is why you are getting thevalue as but if you see the value . that represents that , there is a negative correlation betweenprice and age . since there is a negative symbol over there and the correlation is above . thatmeans , that the correlation there is a strong negative correlation between age and price . wheneverthe age of the car increases , the price is decreasing that applies same to the kilometre though thecorrelation value is slightly lesser than kilometre it has . , which is . which is equivalent to . . italso have a fair negative correlation between kilometre and price whenever the car has travelled alot the price will automatically go down . for a newer car and for the cars which have travelled reallyless in that case the price is always really high . and if you look at . as the weight of the carincreases the price is also increasing that is why there is a positive correlation value here that is . .you can also look at the relationship between kilometre and age . there is a fair relationship positiverelationship between kilometre and age because the values is . as the age of the car increases thekilometre is already increased . similarly you can interpret from different values of different variablesand here we have used the pearson correlation . if you want to look out for other correlationmeasures you can specify that under the method argument .so , now we have cometo end of the session . so , let summarize whatever we have seen it in this lecture . we have startedwith creating frequency tables to check what is the frequency of each categories in the categoricalvariable . and then we were interested in looking at the relationship between two categoricalvariables using a two way tables . and then we have also seen how to convert the two way table intojoint probabilities , marginal probabilities and conditional probability . and we have also seen how tocheck the relationship between two numerical variables using a measure called correlation . thankyou . department of computer science and engineering indian institute of technology , madrasso , in this lecture we are going to see about the control structures . and under the control structures iam going to cover if elif family , for loop and while loop . and , after that we are going to also look atthe functions , what do we mean by function and how do we define a function using python ?so , let us start with control structures in python , whenever we mean control structures i am going touse if elif family for loops and while loops . let us see where do we use if elif and for loops and whileloops . so , whenever you want to execute certain commands only when the certain condition issatisfied . so , in that case you can go for if else statements , the condition can also be single or youcan also give multiple condition , in that case you will have multiple else statements . the other one iswhen to use for and while loops wherever we want to execute certain commands repeatedly and usethe certain logic to stop that iteration , in that case for and while loop will be helpful .so , first we will look into the if else family of constructs , if else and if elif else are a family ofconstructs , where a condition is first checked , if it is satisfied only then the operations will beperformed . if , the condition is not satisfied the code exits the construct or moves on to the otheroptions . so , whenever we use just an if statement or with an else statement or with using multipleif 's and multiple else clause . the first check would be the condition , whenever the condition issatisfied only then the code will be executed or the statement will be executed , otherwise the codeexits the construct itself and moves to the other options . so , that is how the if else family of theconstructs works .let us see different task for each construct . so , first we will lookinto if construct , the command would be if expression colon and statements in the next line . if is akey word , if the condition is satisfied whatever condition you have given it under the expression ,then the statements will get executed . otherwise , the code exit the construct itself . next , we willmove ahead and see what is the syntax would be for if else construct . it forms a basis from the ifconstruct , wherever we have given the first statement , using the if keyword and followed by ifkeyword you have to give the expression to be checked , that is where the condition to be specified .and , after that you give the statements that needs to be executed , if the condition is satisfied , if thecondition is not satisfied give another statement under the else clause . so , using if elif else constructyou can basically give multiple condition that needs to be checked in order to execute a statement orin order to execute any line of code . in that case the command would be like , if expression is beingsatisfied , then execute the statement , if it is not satisfied then execute the next condition . if that isnot being satisfied , then it also comes to the next else clause , where the that statement will getexecuted . so , the else clause statement will get executed only when the other expressions are notsatisfied . basically , the other conditions are not satisfied .so , now we will look intofor loop , now we are going to look into the syntax and the different loops here , in the upcomingminutes we will be looking at in terms of an example also . so , first we will look at the syntax for forloop . so , whenever you want to execute certain commands repeatedly and use a certain logic to stopthe iteration you can go for for loop . let us look at the syntax on how to use the for loop , thecommand should be like for iter in sequence colon and followed by statements in the second line . so ,this is the simple command that is used to construct a for loop .next , we will seeabout the while loop and the syntax for while loop a while loop is used , when a set of commandsare to be executed depending on a specific condition . basically , a while loop will be executed as longas a condition is true , whenever the condition becomes false , whenever the condition you have givenbecomes false , the while loop execution will stop . so , the task being here is the while loop and thecommand to construct a while loop is while is the function inside the braces , you have to give thecondition . and , as long as that condition is true the statements we have given in terms of statementwill get executed , whenever that condition becomes false , that is when the while loop will get stopexecuting .so , now we are going to see an example to know how we can use if elseand for loops . so , here we have been working with the data set called toyota , where we are seeinghow to read them and how to do basic pandas data frame operations ? from there i have just used asingle variable called price , which represents the price of the cars , price of the pre owned cars . so , iam using the price variable from the toyota data , where i am going to create bins from the pricevariable using if else and for loops . because , the price variable is a continuous variable where it justhas the values for the price of the pre owned cars , if i want to segregate those prices into buckets ,then i can use if else and for loops , let us see how to we do that . the binned values as i mentioned iam going to bin the values . so , those binned values will be stored as classes in a new column as priceclass . so , in that case i should be creating a new column to the existing dataframe . so , now , i amgoing to create a new column to the existing toyota data , where i have read and kept it as cars dataone . so , using the .insert function , i can give the position to which the column should be added andthe column name and i have given blank . so , that all the it will create a column with the blank values .so , now a new column has been created as price class so , that we can store all the bin values asclasses .so , using if else and for loops , i am going to convert all the values intocategories , where the categories represent the range of the price one is being low and other oneis being high and other one is being medium . so , if i want to segregate those values intocategories i want to basically give some condition in which it can happen . so , i am going to use thatusing if statement . so , what i am starting here is i have used the for loop i have initiated the for loophere , where i have given the iter in sequence , where i is the indexing variable in the sequence . i havegiven the sequence using the range function , where i have given the starting value as and it shouldhave the value till the length of price . so , the value will be and i have given comma , then itwill the iteration will happen in the steps of . so , now i have given from which the iteration shouldhappen . now , i have given the sequence in which the iteration should happen . now , this is time togive the condition on price . the first condition being i want to make i want to make some records , iwant to bucket some records as loop by giving the condition , whenever the price is less than or equalto , then keep them as in the range low right . in that case i can just give a condition , sayingaccess the price variable from the cars data dataframe and give a condition here , whenever it isless than or equal to , then execute this statement that is cars data price class becomes low .basically , equate a value low to the new variable price class . so , this will happen for each andevery row and it will check whether the price of the car is less than or equal to or not . if it isthen it basically equate them equate the basically then it will name the row as low . so , there isanother condition using elif statement , because i need to give conditions here one is on low andone is on high . and , whatever is not being satisfied with low and high , i keep them asmedium . and all those rows will be kept it as medium . so , in this case i have conditions hereone is price less than or equal to . and , the other one is being whenever the price is greaterthan , then in that case the price will be , in that case those rows will be named as high andthat will be stored in the column price class . so , whenever these two conditions are not satisfied ,whenever any row is greater than and less than , then all those rows will be named asmedium . so , there is a bound here . so , the whatever rows that are being named as medium willhave all the rows wherever the price is greater than , and wherever the price is less than orequal to . so , this is how i can give using for if elif and else . so , if you see that to just tosummarize whatever we have done it in for loop and if else , a for loop is implemented and theobservations are separated into categories right now . so , the price being upto and betweenand and greater than , and we keep the price less than or equal to as lowand we keep between and as medium and whenever the price exceeds , thenwe keep them as high . and , we know that the classes have being stored in a new column calledprice class . so , in each of the records of price class there will be a label called row low high ormedium that is exactly based on the condition , which is being represented here . and , you havedone that so , using for loop we have seen how to do the iteration and using the if and else clause wehave seen how to give condition based on a variable ?so , next let us see an examplefor while loop . so , a while loop is used whenever you want to execute statements until a specificcondition is violated . here , i am going to use a while loop , over the length of the column price class ,and an if else loop is used to bin the values and store it as classes . so , whatever we have done it inthe previous slide i am going to repeat the same thing using while loop . so , you can do that usingboth for and while . so , here i have initialized my indexing variable as , the difference between bothfor and while loop is in the previous slide , you would have given your iteration step in the sequenceitself using your for , but in this while loop you are giving your you are just initializing your indexingvariable as and you will give the iteration step at the last only . because , the first check of the whileloop is the condition check . so , the while loop will be executed as long as i is less than length of carsof data that is , the while loop will get stop executing whenever it exceeds that condition .whenever your i becomes your while loop will get stop executing . so , next i have a conditionhere , the same condition being represented here with the same if elif and else clause the differencebeing here is you give the iteration steps at the end of the loop , whenever you are using a while loopand you give the iteration steps at the beginning of the loop itself using a for loop . so , here if yourecall whenever the price is less than or equal to then keep them as low under the columnprice class . and , whenever it exceeds then keep them as high under the variable priceclause and whenever both the conditions are not satisfied , whenever the price is greater thanand less than or equal to , then in that case that observations will be named as medium . so ,now , we have seen the examples for both for loop and while loop to basically bucket all the pricevalues into categories as low high and medium . there might be other functions which willdo it thereby there are so , many inbuilt function that does this , but using a for loop when you have acontrol on whatever you are doing with the steps , then you can use a for loop and while loop . wehave now bins , now categories now low high and medium . so , we do not know how manyrecords fall into row , and how many records fall into low , and how many records fall into high ,and how many of them fall into medium ? so , let us just see how you are observations have beencategorized ? so , now , we have basically used a loop to combine all the price values into threecategories one as low medium and high . now , i want to check how the categorization hashappened .. so , in that case i will be looking at frequencies of each categories , that islow , medium , and high , i can get the frequencies of each categories using value countsfunction . so , whenever you have a series you can use value counts that basically returns seriescontaining the count of unique values . i want to check the count of unique values under the priceclass , that is the variable name and cars data one is the dataframe name , and.value counts is thefunction , if you use that it basically gives an output which is shown here . so , you haveobservation that falls under the medium category that is basically those cars are in the range ofmedium , those cars have the price in the range of medium . and , you have observation withthe low range and you have only observation with the high range . and , the name beingprice class and the data type of the output is being in . so , now , we will see how to basicallyconvert your numerical values into a categorical variable right , because now we have converted thenumerical variable price into the categories as low , medium and high , that becomes acategorical variable . now , that is why we have checked the unique count of each categories , see youcan if you want to do that you can use either a for loop or a while loop . so , this is where all the whileloop and for loop comes into play .let us see about the functions in python . basicallya function accepts input arguments and produces an output by executing the valid commandspresent in that function . and , the function name and the file name need not be of the same , becauseyou can have a different file name and a different function name , that holds good in python . and , afile name can have one or more function definition . say , if you have a file where you have defined afunction , that function file can have one or more function definition , there would not be any issueswhile you are calling a function in a different file . and , the functions are created using the commanddef and a colon with the statements to be executed indented as a block . so , this is how you define afunction you use a def function and the function name is followed by that , say inside the parenthesisyou basically need to give the parameters based on which your calculations will be done . so , usingthe statements here you will give the basically an equation or an expression , that should becalculated that should be solved based on the parameters , that you have given inside the functionname parameters . and , the since the statements are not demarcated explicitly , it is essential tofollow correct indentation practices . because , other programming languages the python does notsupport the curly braces , for any control structures or function rather it uses the indentation toexplicitly show the demarcation . so , the indentation should be followed . so , your statement shouldbe exactly slightly away from your first three letters of your function name , whenever you type acolon and give an enter , it will automatically comes with an indentation . so , it is suggested to not tochange that indentation .. so , now let us see an example on how to define a function ? so , weare going to define a function which will allow us to convert the age variable from months to years bydefining a function . i am also using the age variable from the toyota data , that we have that we haveworking with . so , in that case age is being represented in terms of months , but that does not conveyme the exact information or the efficient information , but that is not the exact way where i can inferthe age , in rather than keeping the age in terms of months i can also keep the age in years . so , iwant to convert the age variable from months to years by defining a function . so , the convertedvalue should be stored in a new column . so , i do not want to touch the existing column rather i amgoing to store all the values in the new column called age converted . so , i should be creating a newcolumn called age converted now . so , i have created age converted using the same.insert function ,where i want to keep the age converted in the th position and initially i want to have all the valuesas , that is what i have given as here . so , once you have executed this line a new column will becreated as age converted .so , now let us define a function to convert the age frommonths to years . so , here i am defining a function c convert and the function takes arguments andreturns only one value . so , def is the key word that is used to create a function definition or thecommand that is used to function , that is used to create a function definition . and , the functionname is c convert and the inside the function i have given the argument called val and followed bythe semicolon in the next line i have a variable called val converted that represents value converted .how am i going to convert i am going to convert that value by dividing , whatever value that is givenhere by . so , this is the default argument . so , whenever you called the any function you can usethe c convert and give a variable there or give a value there , that will be divided by and it willreturn the value converted val . and , it will return the value or that is stored in the val converted . so ,now , using this function definition , i can basically convert the age variable into months , i can basicallyconvert the age variable from months to years . how , i can basically use the same function here thatis c convert and inside the function i just basically need to pass in the arguments for val to divide anynumber by . so , i want to divide all the numbers from age by . so , i have given cars data age .so , all the observations under the age column will be divided by . so , there i get the age convertedto years . so , if you see i am storing that into the new column called age converted from the dataframe cars data . so , this will this new variable will have all the age that has been converted intoyears . and , whenever you are doing any numerical operation python always comes with todecimal points , i do not want to have a variable which has so , many decimal that also does notconvey the exact information of year . so , i want to round it off to only decimal . so , that it does nothave to decimal point it will just have a digit after a decimal point .so , till now wehave been seeing about a function which accept a single argument or multiple arguments and whichwill arrive at a output value single output value . now , we are going to move ahead and see how todefine a function with multiple inputs and arrive at a multiple outputs . so , function in python takesmultiple input objects , but return only one object as output . so , you can have variable one andvariable as inputs to your function . but , your output will be in a form of only single object , but thatobject can contain multiple values like a lists can contain multiple elements and a tuple can containmultiple elements and a dictionary can have multiple keys in values . so , in that case you will havemultiple results in form of a single object . so , like i said list tuples or dictionaries can be used toreturn multiple outputs as required .let us see an example to see how function withmultiple inputs and output works . so , here by defining function with multiple inputs and outputs iam going to do two things one is converting age variable from months to years and another one isgetting kilometers run per month . so , the converted values of kilometer will be stored in a newcolumn called km per month we have already created one new variable for age as age converted .so , i am just going to create one more for km per month that is also using the same insert functionwhere i have set the position for the kilometer per month variable and the variable name beingkilometer per month and i need to fill basically all the values with s initially so , i have given here .so , now let us define a function which accepts multiple arguments and which will also give usmultiple results as a single object . so , here is the function definition . so , as i mentioned a multipleinput multiple output function c convert has been defined , this is the function c convert and thefunction also takes in inputs value and value . and , the output is going to be returned in theform of a list that is how i have defined a function , if you see from the start i have defined a functioncalled c convert i have given inputs here value , value . and , i am going to get two output one isvalue converted from for the age from months to years and the other one is the ratio . so , val andval divided by basically divides all the observations under the age variable and give you anoutput and that will be stored in val converted . and , now i have created another variable calledratio where my interest is to convert all the kilometers run per month . so , in that case i am going todivide each and every observations of the kilometer by the value , where i am going to divide valueby value . and , it will return both value converted and ratio in a form of list , because i have giventhe values inside the square brackets so , that the value will be returned in a form of list .so , let us see how do we do that ? so , here age and kilometer columns of the data set are going to bethe input to the function , because i am going to convert age from months to years , i am going toconvert kilometers run and i am going to get the km per month . and , the outputs are going to beassigned to age converted and kilometer per month where we have created new variables . and ,here the outputs are going to be assigned to age converted and kilometer per month , because i amgoing to save my output simultaneously . so , as you know in python you can assign multiple valuestoo by giving multiple variable names . so , that is what i am going to give in here . so , here thevariable the first variable name is age converted from the dataframe cars data . and , the secondvariable is kilometer per month from the cars data . and , what i am going to save here is the outputfrom the c convert function , which i have defined it in the previous slide . so , c convert is thefunction and the input would be cars data of age . so , age will be the first input and the kilometerwould be the second input . and , i have stored whatever value i am getting it using the first argumentas age converted to age converted and whatever i will get it using the second variable will be storedinto the second variable called kilometer per month . so , let us look at an output after using the cconvert function what is the output that we are likely to get . i have used.head function to basicallylook the first rows of my dataframe just to see how my variables have been populated . so , if yousee the price class this is using the for loop and while loop which we have done , where we havebucketed all the price values . if , you look at here there are price values like , we have givensome conditions where , if it exceeds some value , then keep it as high low and medium , thenin that case the first rows have been stored as high . and , if you see we have converted the agewhich were in months to years i have just divided every row with . so , i got . . but , if yousee here this is not the rounded off value . so , this snippet just gives you the output with decimalvalues , you can also round that to decimal point , because this value does not make sense for youcan also round off your values to decimal points . so , the value will be . and you can also get thekilometer run per month . here , you have the kilometer which is like and if you want to get itfor month , then we have used the function and we have also got how many kilometers that the carhas travelled per month .. so , now we have come to the end of lectures . so , let ussummarize whatever we have done till now . we have seen about the control structures where wehave covered if elif family followed by that we have seen for and while loops with examples . we havealso seen about the functions where the function can accept multiple inputs and give you a singleoutput , we have also seen how a function can accept multiple inputs and give you multiple output asa single object . thank you .so , we have been looking at the pandas dataframesin the previous lectures . so , let us have a quick recap on what we have done in the previous lecture .so , in the previous lecture we have seen about the data types the two broad main data types thatare numeric in character which we will be working with often and what they represents and wherewe can use numeric and character data types . we have also checked the data types of each columnto generally know about what are the data types we are going to work with for the analysis and wehave also seen how to get the count of unique data types to get an overall idea about how manyvariables are there with different data types and we have also seen how to select the data based ondata types . for example , if you want to perform any operations only on a specific data type we canalso do that by selecting the data based on the particular data types . and we have also looked at theconcise summary of dataframe where we have got some information about the dataframe withrespect to what is the data type of each variables and how many non null values are there undereach column and which also gave us the memory used by the dataframe and then we checked theformat of each column . and we found out that there are few columns that has not been readproperly . so , we have gone back and looked at the unique elements of each column to get an ideaabout what is the reason behind variables being read with different data types which are notexpected . so , these are the things we have seen in the previous lectures .and in thislecture we are going to see how to import the data . in the previous lectures we found out that therewere question marks and other special characters that are not being considered as blank while you .so , now , in this lecture we are going to import the data by considering all of those after that we aregoing to again look at the concise summary of data to cross verify whether there is any differenceafter importing the data by considering all those special characters or not . after that we are going toconvert the variable s data types because in the previous lectures we have encountered that somevariables are of not expected data type . so , in this lesson we are going to convert variables to theexpected data type and we are also going to look at the category which is object data type what isthe effect being the category data type and what is the effect being a object data type . next we aregoing to clean the column door since it has few strings to it like , and . so , we are going to cleanthat to make the doors columns perfect for the future analysis after that we are going to get thecount of missing values to basically arrive at a solution on how we are going to go ahead with themissing values . so , now , let us try to import the data by considering the all forms of missing values .so , now , basically before importing we need to know how missing values are being represented inthe data set in order to make any reasonable decisions because you need to be really sure how themissing values are presented in your dataframe , whether it is a blank value or zeros or any questionmarks or with any special characters . so , but we have encountered in our data frame the missingvalues exist in the form of nan which represents the blank values . double question mark and fourquestion mark represents the missing values wherever they do not have any records for , but we donot have to worry about the blank values because python by default replace blank values with nan .so , now , we know what are the other forms of missing values we have in our dataframe . so , now , iam going to import the data considering the other forms of missing values in a dataframe . so , i amusing the same command as earlier that is.read csv from the pandas library and pd being the alias .so , the input being toyota csv file and the index i have set at to . so , that the first column will betreated as the index column and i have added another argument called na values . so , in theargument i have given double question mark and four question marks to basically say consider allthese values as nan values . so , now we have seen how to import the data by considering all forms ofmissing values in your dataframe .now let us move ahead and get the concisesummary of dataframe because i really want to see the difference after changing the question markswith nan values because ideally there are missing values . so , let us check that . so , this is the outputthat we got before replacing any special characters with nan . if you see i have highlighted kilometreand the horsepower column . so , kilometre basically had no missing values , but after replacingall the special characters with nan the kilometres non null values have been decreased from tobecause all rest of the values actually being question marks , but that has not been treated asblank values rather it has been treated as just categories . so , that is why you see a drop in valuesthat is as and after that there is also the similar case with horsepower initially there were nomissing values all the has non null values , but when we consider all the special characters withas nan it says non null values are there other observations has missing values underhorsepower column . so , this step is really important whenever you are performing any analysis ifthere are any other forms of missing values that is being encountered in your dataframe you canmake sure that you are replacing all those special characters with the default value . so , now , we havesorted out the issues where we replaced all the special characters with nan . we have to solve theother issue by converting variables data type to the expected data type .because inthe previous lecture we have seen that some of the variables have not been read properly with thecorrect data type and we have encountered the reasons as well now it is time to change or convertthe variables data type to the expected data type . and astype is the function which is used toexplicitly convert data types from one to another and the syntax being astype of data type you canbasically specify to which data type you want to convert it to and you use have to use yourdataframe name . so , here i am interested in converting the metcolor on the automatic variable toobject data type because those values represents just the categories to it , i am going to convert themto object data type . so , how i am doing here is i am accessing the metcolor from the cars data andusing the astype function , i am converting the metcolor to object by giving object inside thefunction . so , whatever i am doing here that should be reflected back to original variable that is why ihave equated that to cars data of metcolor . so , now , metcolor has been converted to objectsimilarly you can try that for automatic . so , i have done it here i have converted the automaticvariables also to object data type and i have reflected the changes to the original variable as well .now , we have converted the metcolor in automatic to object data type , but we have already seenthere are two data types that the python can handle with respect to character data type . one isbeing category and another one is being object . we have already changed everything to object thereis also another data type called category right . so , let us see what is the impact when we have thesemetcolor or any categorical variable as category or as object .so , here is a slide whichwill illustrate the impact of variables being category and the impact of variables being object datatype . so , nbytes is the command that is used to get the total bytes consumed by the elements ofcolumns , we are going to look fueltype as object data type and fueltype as category data type . so , iam going to get the total bytes consumed by the elements with respect to object data type as well ascategory data type , for that nbytes can be used and the syntax would be n dimensional array.nbytes .so , it can be n dimensional array and you can use nbytes from it . so , i am using like i am accessingthe fuel type from the cars data frame and i have used.nbytes to get the total bytes consumed bythe elements where the fueltype is being object . so , when the fueltype is being object it hasconsumed bytes , when it is of category . so , here if you check i have converted fueltype tocategory and then i am checking the total bytes consumed by the element of the column , but it hasdrastically dropped down to bytes . so , this is the advantage of keeping categorical variables ascategory data type instead of keeping them as objects . so , this will be really useful when you aredealing with a huge amount of data and you want to reduce the space that is being allocated to eachand every variable or for each and every cell . so , in that case you would go for category data type forall the string values that you have in your dataframe , but in our case we are just dealing with a lessamount of data . so , there is no need to explicitly convert the variable to category , but if you see weare going to go ahead and give the fueltype as object and the slide is just for the illustrationpurpose .and we have changed the data type for few variables , now i want torecheck the data type of variables after all the conversions that i have made . so , i am again checkingthe concise summary of the dataframe cars data using the.info command , if you see now all thevariables are of expected data type . for example , kilometre is of float metcolor is of objectautomatic color is of object . so , now we have to clean the column doors .because inthe previous lecture we have seen that under the doors column it has some string values to it . so , ijust want to recap what we have seen in the doors column , we have checked the unique values ofvariable doors it turned out to have some unique values which are in numbers as well as in strings .so , those basically represents five , four , three in numbers . so , there might be cases where they havewrongly typed the numbers in terms of strings . so , now if you want to have a consistent values like ifyou want to only have numerical values like , , and you can always go back and change all thestring values to numerical values by using a command in python . so , the command is replace that isused to replace a value with the desired value you can replace any numerical to string as well asstring to numericals . so , the syntax would be dataframe.replace . inside the function i have used thevalue to be replaced and after that the second argument would be what is the value that you aregoing to replace it with . so , here i have problem in three strings . so , using a replace command i canreplace all string values to numbers . so , let us take the string three first . so , i am accessing the doorscolumn from the dataframe cars data and by using.replace command . the first argument that i haveused is the value that should be replaced that is and using which value that is the number and ihave used inplace is equal to true . so , the modifications done in the dataframe will be reflectedback in the dataframe that you are working on . similarly i have done it for all the other strings likefour and five . so , now , i have replaced all the string values to numbers we do not want multiplevalues which represents the same meaning . now , i have a consistent values like , , and . so ,now , this is not the only way where you can replace any value with the desired value there areseveral function that does the same one is using where . so , you can try out where function fromnumpy , but you can also use the where function on pandas libraries as well . so , you can try that outto replace all the string values with the numbers .now , it is time to convert the doorsto int because whatever levels you have added , whatever values you have replaced it with it willcreate it as a new set of values because python can not differentiate between the existing set ofvalues and the newly added values . so , it will basically create new set of categories for example ,again it will have because that is the categories that we have added newly . so , in that case letus convert them back to integer . so , that , , and become the integer data type thatrepresents the number of doors being , , and . so , as we know that i can convert them back tointeger by using the command astype and i have reflected the changes to the original variabledoors . so , this is to basically have the existing levels as it is if we replace any values that will getadded as a new level rather than updating it in the original level . so , just to avoid that confusion iam reconverting them back to the integer data type .so , now we are done withcleaning the doors column . so , now , we have to check whether there are any missing values in yourdataframe or not . so , to check the count of missing values present in each columndataframe.isnull.sum will be used basically isnull is a function which gives you an output in terms ofboolean values that is true or false . so , it will consider the whole dataframe because you areapplying the isnull on the dataframe wherever you have missing values it will be represented as true ,wherever the cell does not have any missing values it will be represented as false and i have used.sum to sum up all the true values because i am interested in getting the count of missing valuespresent in each column . so , that is why i have used .sum after isnull . so , this is the input that i havegiven cars data.isnull.sum that will give me the missing values present in each column . so , underthe price column i do not have any missing values , but if you see under age we have missingvalues present under the age column . so , here is the output for the command isnull.sum . so , underthe price variable we do not have any missing values , but if you see the age variable has missingvalues and the kilometre variable has missing values , similarly fueltype has , horsepower hasand metcolor has missing values . so , now , we know that there are some missing valuesunder each columns and the missing values are not same across all the columns because it isdiffering with each variables . so , we have to come up with the logic approach to see how we aregoing to fill those missing values or how we are going to deal with this missing values at all .so , let us summarize whatever we have seen in this lecture we have imported the data byconsidering all the other forms of missing values as blank values by default python takes it as null .after imported the data we have got the concise summary of data where we have checked thedifference after replacing all the special characters with nan values , we have also converted thevariables to the expected data types . next , we have seen what is the impact of having a variablewith the data type category and having the variable of the data type object . and we have alsocleaned that column called doors where it had few strings to it and we have replaced all the stringsto numbers . so , now , we also have an idea about how many missing values are present in eachcolumn . so , in the upcoming lectures we will be seeing about how to go ahead and deal with themissing values by imputing those .hello all welcome to the lecture on pandas dataframes .. so , let us have a quick recap on what we have done in the previous lecture , on pandas dataframes .so , in the previous lecture we have seen about introduction to pandas , where we have beenintroduced to the pandas library , then we have seen about how to import the data into spyder . so ,once we imported we have also seen , how to create a copy of original data , we have also seen howto get the attributes of data , followed by that we have also seen indexing and selecting data .. so , in this lecture we are going to see about the data types of variables in a dataframe . we aregoing to look about numeric data types and character data types , which we are going to use often inour analysis . once , we know about the two data types we are going to see , how to check the datatypes of each column in your dataframe . followed by that we are going to look at , how to get thecount of unique data type ? after that we will also see how to select the data based on particular datatypes . and , then we are going to look at the concise summary of the dataframe , followed by that weare going to check the format of each column just to cross verify whether the data type is of desireddata type or not . after , that we are going to get the unique elements of each column , so , in thislecture we will be looking at different topics as we have mentioned in detail . so , first we will lookabout data types .. so , the way information gets stored in a dataframe or in anypython object basically affects , whatever analysis that you are going to perform on your dataframe .as well as that results in a different form of outputs from the calculations that you have made . forexample , you can not perform any numerical operations on a string similarly you can not do anystring related operations on a numerical data . so , we have to be sure of what data type you arehandling in a dataframe . so , basically there are two main types of data as discussed one is beingnumeric and another one is being character types . and , numeric data types basically includes all thenumerical values , which are in terms of integers and floats for example , integer value beingrepresented as and float values are called whenever it has a numerical value with the decimal . so ,here if we have decimal values after , then it will be represented as float for example , as . .this is about the numeric data types that the python can handle . next , we are going to look aboutthe character types . so , character data types are nothing , but all the strings are known as objects inpandas , which can store values that contains numbers as well as characters . so , whatever value thatis been enclosed inside a single or double quotes will be considered as a string and that is beingrepresented as object in pandas . and , for example , if you have a string which is enclosed inside thesingle or double quotes like , category that becomes a string value or an object . even , though it hasboth strings and numbers whatever has been enclosed within single or double quotes will beconsidered as string in python . we will look in deep about , what string values represents and whatnumerical values represents ?. so , first we will look about the numeric types wheneverwe deal with the pandas library using the python tool . it is not necessary that both the pandas andpython uses the same names for data types , because pandas and base python uses different namesfor different data types . for example , here is a table to illustrate you , how the data type is named inpython and how the data type is being named in pandas library and followed by that we have thedescription as well . first we will look at integer that is being represented as int in terms of basepython and in if you look at the pandas library the integers will be represented in terms of int .and , int corresponds to all numeric characters it can contain all the numeric characters . next is afloat float is being represented as float in python whereas in pandas it is being represented asfloat . so , float basically corresponds to all the numeric characters with decimal values . and ,these simply refers to the memory allocated to store the data in each cell , which effectivelyrelates to how many digits it can store in each cell ? so , at the max it can store up to bits which isequivalent to bytes . so , why we are really concerned about the memory allocation in a each cell ,because allocating space ahead of time allows computers , to optimize storage and processingefficiency . because , whenever you read any data into spyder or into any ide of python , it basicallygets read with the data type for each and every variable according to the values that it has . so , inthat case it always allocates memory to store the data in each cell just to optimize the storage andprocessing efficiency . so , now we have seen about the numeric types , where we have seen aboutinteger and float data types .. next , we are going to see about the character types . inpython there are two data types that can handle character types one is category and another one isbeing object . so , now , there are two different data types that are available for character types . so , letus look at the difference between category and object . so , when you look at the first point the firstpoint describes what the category data type would be basically any string value consisting of only afew different values , then that becomes a category . and , we have to convert such string variable to acategorical variable , which can save us some memory . instead of keeping too many string values in aform of same representation we can always convert them to category data type to have it as acategories . a categorical variable takes on a limited fixed number of possible values , because thereis limits to the length , that is being fixed and it can always accommodate only fixed number ofpossible values you can not have to different values , which forms categories . so , in that casewe always if you want to have too many categories in your column , then you can go for object ,because , the column will be assigned as object data type where it has mixedtypes . basically ,whenever you have numbers which is being represented as , that can also be an object , if it isbeing enclosed within single or double quote or even if your column has mixed numbers that iscategory , category , category , that can also be an object . and , the other point is if a columncontains nan values , basically in python all the blank cells will be filled with the default nan values .and , the next point would be , if a column contains nan that is just a blank cell . then , the pandas willdefault to object data type , because by default whenever you read any blank cell in spyder , all theblank cell will be read as nan values and by default it will default to object data type . because all thenans will be considered as a different value so , it becomes an object data types itself . and , here hasan advantage is that for strings the length is not fixed , how many ever number of elements you canhave as a string and there is no limit to the number of possible values that you can have as an object .so , this is the difference between the category and the object character types . so , now , we have seenthe difference between the category and object data types .. so , now we know aboutthe basic data type that we are going to often work with . so , now , it is time to check the data typesof each columns of the data frame that we are working with . so , basically if you want to check thedata type of each column , because whenever you have been given a data , you want to really checkwhat is the structure of the data that means , which variable has which data type ? in , that case youcan use dtypes , because that returns a series with the data type of each column and the syntaxwould be you use dtypes along with the data frame name . so , data frame.dtypes will give you aseries with the data type of each column . so , the input would be cars data dtypes , where carsthe data is the data frame , that we are looking at and the output is shown below where you havemultiple variables correspondingly you have the data type of each variables . when we look at thefirst variable that is price , the price data type is of integer , which is the desired one and the agebeing float and the kilometer has been read as object . similarly , you will be able to check the datatype for each variables using the dtypes commander . so , now we have an overall idea about whatare the data types that we are going to work with using the cars data . there is also an option whereyou can get the count of unique data types available in your data frame . so , in that caseget dtype counts , returns the counts of unique data types in the data frame . so , if you want tosummarize how many in variables are there and how many float variables are there , then inthat case you can use get dtype counts command . and , the syntax will be you will use the commandalong with the data frame name . so , let us see how to do that ? so , here is an input where i havegiven cars data .get dtype counts . so , that will give me an output which is shown here . so , i havethe summarization here , where i have different types of data type as well as i have thecorresponding count also . so , basically on the whole i have variables of float data type and ihave variables of int data type . as well as i have variables , which consist of object data type ?and dtype int represents the output data types since it has the values it is being represented asint .so , now we also have an overall idea about the count of unique data types that we aregoing to handle with . so , now , we know about how to get the data type of each variables . so , theremight be cases where you want to perform the operations only on a numerical data type . similarly ,there can be cases where you are going to work with only categorical data type . in that case , there isalso a platform where you can select the data based on the data types available in your dataframe .so , let us see how to do that ? so , select dtypes is the command that we are going to use , to selectthe data based on the data types . and , along with that you have to give the dataframe name andsince that is from the pandas library this it is being represented as pandas.dataframe.select dtypes .and , this command returns a subset of the columns from the dataframe , based on the column typesyou have specified inside a function . so , let us see how to use the function , here dataframe wouldbe the dataframe name and here is a command that the data select dtypes inside the functionthere are two arguments . one is include and another one is exclude both being nan by default , if youwant to select only those columns , which are of object data type , then you can just use object insidethe include argument and if you want to exclude any particular data type from your analysis . in thatcase you can use the data types under the exclude argument . so , let us see an example how we aregoing to do that ? so , here is the input the dataframe that we are working with is cars data one . and ,the command being select dtypes and inside the function , i have given exclude is equal to object .and , whatever data type that you are giving that should be given inside the square braces , becauseyou can also give multiple data types object comma int . basically , in that case you will beexcluding all the columns which are of object and integer data types . here , i just want to includethe object data type . so , i have just given object . so , the output would be a dataframe with thevariables , which are not of object data type . so , here is the output we have price age metcolorautomatic cc and weight with the data type integer and float . for example , the fueltype the doorsall those have been excluded . so , this is how we basically select the data based on the data types .so , next we are going to see about how to get the concise summary of dataframe . so , there is acommand called info that returns a concise summary of a dataframe , the concise summary includesthe data type of index index being the row labels , the data type of row labels is what the outputgives as well as it gives the data type of columns , it also gives the count of non null values . basically ,how many filled values are there in your dataframe . also , it gives the memory usage of thedataframe and the syntax would be you use the info command along with the dataframe name .so , let us see how to do that i have given cars data .info . so , the output will be similar to this , wherethe output starting line is pandas.core.frame.dataframe . so , it is of pandas core dataframe and intindex being the index are being represented in terms of int , where you have andentries , which are ranging from the to row labels and totally you have columns in yourdataframe . and , after that you have list of variables along with that , you have non null values andwhat is the data type corresponding to that variable . so , for example , under the price variable thetotal observations are and there are also non null values and the data type of price beinginteger . in this case i have highlighted few rows . so , the purpose to check the concise summary ofdataframe is to verify , whether all the variables have been read with the proper data type or not . ifnot we have to go back and convert them back to the desired data type . so , for example , price andage are of expected data type and if you see kilometer , there are no missing values actually andobservations are non null and it is being read as object kilometer would be ideally be numbers .so , it should have not been read as object , but in this case it have been read as object . similarly , fueltype should be of object there is no problem in that and if you see hp , metcolor and automatic , theyhave been read as object , float , int . why , because metallic color automatic basically representscategories under that column , metallic color represents the whether the car has metallic color ornot . so , it should be ideally it should be having some categories to it . so , there is some problem thatis why it has been read as float and if you look at the automatic column automatic alsorepresents the type of gear box that the car possess . so , in that case it should ideally be categoriesand it should ideally be object . in this case it is int .so , now let us just check theformat of each column . so , just to summarize by using info , we can see that kilometer has been readas object instead of integer right . next , we have horsepower that has been read as object instead ofinteger as well . next , being metallic color and automatic both have been read as float and intrespectively . since , it just has values zeros and ones that is the reason that it has been read as floatand int . but , it has been read as object , because since it has numbers only ideally it shouldhave been read as integer , but it has been read as object . and , we have also seen there aremissing values present in few variables . so , we have to encounter the reason behind all of thesepoints .so , unique function is used to get the unique elements of a column thesyntax being numpy.unique of array , unique function comes from the numpy library and the inputshould be an array , you can not perform the unique operation on a multiple array it can be done on asingle array only . so , here i have used np.unique that is why because i have imported numpy as np .so , the alias is just np if you have not imported the numpy library at this point of time you can importnumpy library as np and then you can follow with the code here . so , i am just print np.unique andthe input should be an array . so , i am accessing the kilometer variable from the cars data . so , thatwill give me the unique values of kilometer column . so , there are so , many unique values , but onlyfew being shown here , you have a ? ? symbol that is the representation , you are not seeing all of thevalues . and , the special thing about the kilometer is it has a special character that is double questionmark , which has been enclosed with in single quote that is the reason it has been read as objectinstead of . so , whenever you have a special character all the values will be converted to characteror string data type . so , that is why the kilometer has been read as object instead of int .similarly , we are going to look at the variable horsepower . so , i am going to get the unique elementsof the column horsepower using the same unique command . so , you have different values under thehorsepower . and , you also have a special character like question marks that is the reason it hasbeen read as the object instead of int . and , when we look at the metallic color , i am using thesame function dot unique to get the unique elements under the metallic color column . so , basically ithas only the value s and s point and point . so , that is why it has been read as float . since , ithas values and . even , though it has nan values just because the value has decimals to it the wholevariable have been read as float .so , next we are going to look at another columnthat is automatic . i have used the same.unique function to get the unique elements of the columnautomatic . so , the output being and , as we know and represents category part automatic hasbeen read as integer . since , it has value and . next , we are going to look at the variable doorand where we tried to get the unique values out of the doors column , if you see the output there arefew values and also you have values as strings that is being represented as . so , theremight be a typo where all the numerical values have been typed as in characters , similarly forand . so , this might be an error while getting the data from the source . so , this is the problemwhere door has been read as object instead of int , that is because of the values , which are instrings data type . so , now we have an overall idea about how do we check the data type of eachvariable and how to cross verify whether each data type is of expected data type or not . if , not wehave seen how to get the unique elements out of columns to cross verify , whether there are someproblems to it . so , that we can go back and reconvert them back to the expected data type .so , next i am going to summarize whatever we have done in this lecture . basically , we started withlooking into data types that is numeric and character for variables in the data frame . we have alsochecked the data type of each column , whether each data type is of expected data type or not . and ,then we have also seen how to get the count of unique data types to get an overall idea about , whatare the data types that we will be working with in our dataframe . and , next we have seen how toselect the data based on data types . for example , if you want to perform any operations that arecompletely related to numbers , then you would be selecting the data only with respect to numericdata types , which is like integer and float data types . we have seen how to select the data basedon data types ? and , we have also looked at the concise summary of dataframe to basically look atthe variable and what is the data type of each variable along with that , we have also seen how to getthe count of non null values are there , which basically describes how many filled values are there inyour dataframe . after looking at the concise summary of data frame we had an idea about whateach data type represents and after that we have also checked the format of each column just tocross verify , whether it is of expected data type or not , but not all the variables are of expected datatype . so , we have to convert them back to the expected data type in the next lecture , we have alsoseen how to get the unique elements of each column . so , that we got an idea about what eachvariables values are that is causing the variable which is not of expected data type . so , in the nextlecture we will be looking at to resolve all the problems that we have encountered in this lecture .welcome to the nptel course , the joy of computing . i plan to start with the very informalsession with the couple of my friends sitting here , ravikiran and sowjanya , maybe we shouldsay hi to everyone . so i have handpicked a couple of my students who know little aboutprogramming and i would like to see how i can teach them the joy of computing . so initiallythis session will be more of asking questions and then answering , mostly asking questions fromyour side and i will try to answer at my best ok ? so why are you people here firstly ? basicallyi want to learn programming . right , have you tried learning programming before any time ? ijust tried but it seem to be really difficult sort of . so difficult hasn t you have tried programmingand you found it extremely harder task to program is it ? or is it that you find it disinteresting ?it is interesting but there is a notion that programming is difficult so there is that clear in us thatprogramming is difficult so . that s true many people find programming is very difficult anyparticular reason why you think programming is difficult ? because the teacher who taught mewas directly started that rules should be followed and the actual procedure there was no joyor there was no fun in it . right , so have you used programming anywhere , let s say you had areal life situation and u felt the need to write a piece of code and then validate it and verify itor have you used programming anywhere outside your curriculum , let s say apart from courseon programming huh first course on programming i am sure these days high school have , highscholars learn programming right very basic stuff and given that you people have mathematicsbackground off course you would have learned some packages software and even programmingfor that matter so outside your curriculum have u tried learning something ? not really . haveyou felt the need to oh here is a place where i think i should get to my desk try to write a pieceof code and then to see what s the output , has that happened ever ? no i have never felt the needor urge to . so the course will actually be full of that in fact we will be giving you , ok we willclear ting occasion to feel the in need to go write a piece of coded and then see what would bethe output . right ? and most of the course will be simply trying to mimic a game , stimulate agame and then try to play with each other on the computer right . heard of rock , paper scissors .yeah so we have seen where couple of people will be playing , rock paper scissors and thenperson feels the need to write the computer program for it . and there are many more instanceswhere we create that desire in you to see , if this can be programmed and seen right ? ok .one of these questions that many people have is why do we even programmed ? right ? whatis the need for it ? u seems the digital world most of what you see on your cell phone on yourcomputers or be it on the internet webpage all of these are the in fact some programs .someone should have written a piece of code for all these things tats it if i can tell you in onesentence what is programming ? it s about getting things done really really fast right ? you canalways ask me this question can we replace ? can we do without computers ? can we dowithout any of these programming ? off course yes we can . the point is it makes us life reallyreally really simple , it makes it really fast and nice for you to execute a piece of talk forexample if you where to go to your huh train reservation system right ? and see when exactlyyou had travelled from this location to this location . it s very easy for you to put a searchquery inside your reservation website and see where all you have travelled . otherwise youshould maintain a big log of where you go what you have done and then you may have tosearch through it manually . let s say for instance i am travelling from delhi to bang lore ok ,what do i do ? i go to the railway station ensure that the my name is there on the chart boardthe train and my friend is checking whether the train has started on time or not so that heknows it reaches on time and he can even trace where the exactly my train is . and has i amhaving my journey i open youtube and then i can watch a good video may be good movie ,right ? and then i can send a couple of emails to my friends and then i reach bangalore afterreaching bangalore , i open my cell phone and then try booking a taxi through the popularapplication . right ? and then i reach back home and pay the taxi person the money that myphone tells me to pay . you see the entire thing from boarding my train until reaching myhome i have been using applications all of them not even excluding one all of them are bitsand pieces of programming . a whole lot of programming the whole of digital world is ofbeen made of these programming only and the atomic blocks of it how exactly do we goabout getting programming done is what we will be initiating you all with . so you mean tosay every step of our life every day every minute some where we are using programs ? almostevery where we are using it today i can say because you see , you got to a shop and you doonline transfer pay it though your favourite application to the shop keeper in fact every shopkeeper these days they have one application or the other through which you can transfermoney to them right ? so we can hardly imagine a life today without digital way of handlingthings let s say we pay money or we getting amazon getting your favourite product deliveredthrough amazon it all involves the digital world and by digital world that s the system whathappens in this world is the whole lot of code , whole lot of programs where in you preciselytell a computer what to do what not to do how to handle exceptions and things like that .what all you said all of those really amazing which fascinates me that by using programmingso much but i know little of it so . do u think anybody can learn it ? so that s a good question ,this is the frequently asked questions that can i learn programming ? i would sayprogramming is the actually quiet common seneschal . but there is one problem that a studentfaces majorly that is a whole lot of discouragement so it s like if you come and tell me youwant to learn french and i start of giving you literature in french , that you obviously will bediscouraged . first point , second point is when you have someone around you who is doingreally well with programming that s the second form of discouragement , that s the huge formof discouragement that you should be there is a popular tip for chess players when you wantto learn chess you should not play with a champion , you should play with someone who islike you may be slightly better but not a lot better right ? so second discouraging factor forsomeone to learn programming is that they end a felling extremely discourage by looking atsomeone who does really well . first one is whole lot of details we start with somecomplicated stage of programming we don t start from scratch , secondly people around yousort of discourage you and put you off . a one word answer to your question is yes in factany one can program and it s fairly easy process . so can you ball juggle ? if i give you threeballs can u juggle ? it s quite difficult . it s quite difficult . right ? but you see in about a weekor two weeks time anyone can learn ball juggling it s all a matter of practice so programmingis also that it is in fact much much easier then learning a new language and its very verycommon seneschal so in this course what we will be doing is we will be ensuring that we startfrom something that is not programming but it is a lot of fun to do and then slowly introduceyou all to python programming right ? again not through whole lot of details and the do s anddon ts for programmers but we what we will be doing is will be making you solve a problemand then learn a concept in programming . i think this is the fun way to learn programmingthan learning the old school way of reading a entire book on a programming language andtrying to do everything parallel and not knowing why is this even used and how to go aboutdoing this and what not exercise problems that you don t understand things like that , so thewhole of this course will mostly be focused on , you pick a question , you try to answer it andwhile you are answering it you will be learning a concept .do i need to know something else pre requisites ? ok. there is absolutely no pre requisitesassumed for the course , all you need to know is you must understand what i talk tats the onlypre requisite , some amount of computer handling , let s say if u know how to handle your keyboard and if you know how to click on something and open what is called a python terminalthat should be more than enough . right ? if you just follow our instructions you should beable to do that i have heard people telling that computer has some languages ? peopleunderstand only certain set of rules and like also heard that something called c , c . but idon t really know where to start because some say for this you know , you have to know this .and some say for this u have to know something else so i don t really know where to startprogramming ? yes there is a huge confusion for a beginner . where to start ? what to do andthings like that . you see talk about programming language people talk to you about python ,c , c , what not right ? so let me tell you something , most of these things have one thing incommon and that is to understand what programming logic is . right ? there are some three tofour most important skills that one must develop . that should be more than enough . onceyou develop that you in fact can converse in its like the art of articulation , if you know how totalk well after learning a language i am sure you can do well in that language . ok ? learningmany languages is different from the art of articulation so the art of articulation analogouslytranslates to understanding what is called the programming logic . you will see more of itduring the run offer course let me tell you that it doesn t really matter which programminglanguage you learn . what matters is to understand how to think like a computer scientist bythat i mean how to ensure that your brain can actually think how to solve piece of problemusing programming . for that i would strongly suggest that you people go by the course , thecourse is going to assume nothing but we will be teaching python . python is considered to bea very easy and quick language to learn at the same time extremely powerful . right !i have one more question , why do you have so many languages ? why can t you have just oneuniversal language ? or is it necessary to have so many languages ? so this questions answeris slightly tricky that even i don t think even i know the right answer for this question , but if iready to ask u the same question why do you have so many languages in the world peoplespeak right ? you have look at our country like india we have so many languages and letalone that dialects s of them , right . so the reason is some people find so laze and comfortin getting a few tasks done using a particular type of programming language and it developswith time . then they realize , ok if this kind of programming language is used for , let s say forscientific purposes only it is not helping us in building any business application and then theyswitch to a customize programming language and say , so this we will use for businessoriented applications , for example pascal was a general purpose programming language ,fulton , i am talking about years ago fulton its stands for formula translator ok ? thatwas mainly used for scientific reasons and then came cobol , cobol was used forcommon business oriented language that s what it stands for , it was used for businessoriented applications . and then they thought ok fine we need something really rob stand niceand then they came out with c and then they realize in c there was lot of problem s when aprogrammer was programming , it was not easy on his mind so they created this notion ofobjects and that was the birth of object oriented programming . right , there is very gooddifference between c and c . c helps a person program better by keeping his mind freefrom any sort of ambiguity and confusions when he is coding . and then came python becausepython was known to be sort of they kept in mind the physiology of program . c to c arebig leap then the python was like everyone should program , how do we go about doing thatand then since its open for lot of people contributed to it and today its stand really tall as afantastic programming language . so it is all evolution of mans thinking based on the need forsomething , that s the good question by the way . yeah was slightly thinking as you said it wasevolved to us that what i can generalize from what you have told now , so do you think it willfurther evolve will be further move ahead or .. that s again a very interesting question again iam not so sure whether i know the answer off course yes i personally believe that nextgeneration will one thing is for sure i have been observing the programming is getting easierand easier with time . firstly because of the available online resources , secondly because ofthe inherent ease with which you can code with the kind of tools and techniques availabletoday . for example i am not sound little technical don t mind there is something calledintegrated development environments ides where it makes your life really simple to write apiece of , it s like you are talking in some language if you make a mistake you have aearphone small earphone where you hear you made a mistake here you correct it . or you aretyping something and you make a typing mistake and your word processor says this is theright spelling not just that it corrects it automatically or says there is a possible grammar errorhere i am just giving you analogies right , even in programming there are such beautiful whatis called ides which helps you program really really better to the future of programmingwould be any one can program any amount of it and with the whole lot of confidence and theskill set require for one to program back in s is very different from what it is today in factthere are software s called scratch a very popular one which i am going to teach you peopleto begin with you will see the actually fun to program it s a whole lot of fun to program infact you can develop a games of your choice by using tool called scratch . will see more ofit.so you have told us that programming has evolved to be very easier these days , so can youtell us how we will be leaning or how we go about programming in this course ? so in thiscourse , we are going to start from scratch . by scratch i mean absolutely nothing . we onlyassume that you know how to use your mouse and your keyboard that s it ok and from therewe are going to go ahead and teach you almost everything of what one is supposed to knowin programming right ? at the end of the course you will be ready to call yourself aprogrammer and you can actually start programming some non tribunal things . so you meanto say after twelve weeks of the course i will be really ah knowing all the requirements ofrequirements to write a piece of code . see this i should , i should probably take a pause andthen i should make you all realise that programming is a whole lot of practice . it is probably ,it has two steps , one is you need some motivation to programme , that the course is giving youin abundance . no doubts about it , secondly you need to do a whole lot of practice , practicecomes with , you should be inspired , you should be some sort of self motivation , you shouldsit with your friends and then talk to them and then see if there is something that you can takeup as a challenge and then write a piece of code and then see the output that is something thatwe should gradually cultivate right ? with time . this is more like singing , you see i mean youcan not become a fantastic famous singer over a night it involves a whole lot of practice , awhole lot of thinking , a whole lot of culturing of your voice and things like that .programming is exactly that . in this connection i must tell you something that there are manypeople who give up on programming thinking that it is not for them and i must tell you allsomething that to the best of what i have seen to the best of what is known already ,programming is quite straight forward and comes with just few hours of practice but a hugedeterrent for a programming is the de motivation which generally emanates from yoursurroundings or your inability to solve something and things like that . so what you must do isgo in baby steps , don t try to do something very complicated in the beginning of your leaningof the programming , go in baby steps and go as much as possible and talk to a whole lot ofpeople , and off course as in always keep trying . right ? nothing like it . ahh you said aboutprogramming and how we go about it , how can mathematician make use of it ? even i amfrom math background . so you are from mathematics background , be it math , chemistry ,economics , physics you name it . today there is a requirement for all of us to calculate thingsto analyze things , right ? something as non trivial as how much water you intake every day ?right ? what is your , what is the change in weight from the past three four years of anindividual ok ? what is the amount of carbohydrates that you take ? protein that you take ? cancan have something to say about your health . to analyze this kind of data and to infersomething you need programming so you see an nutrition specialist requires programming ,see all though you have packages which can be used to get all these things done , you mustkeep in your mind that this packages have a programme inbuilt , because of which thepackage works and it sometimes helps for you to understand how to programme so that youcan customize whatever you need to do as per your requirements . so i would sayprogramming is definitely not a must for everyone but is a great add on to your skill nomatter what you are doing and no matter what background you hale from .now aday you have applications apps for everything . you have websites for everything , you name ityou have it , so why do you think we have to learn something about that because now a daywe have for all the utility you get something , you have applications . again a good question .so you see the fact that there are so many buildings isn t a reason why you can not have a newbuilding ? right ! the fact that you have so many buildings doesn t stop you fromunderstanding how buildings are made . may be you may want to go one floor up of anexisting building . right ! so if you understand how one can programme ? there are a wholelot of situations where you will feel something is missing here and i can go on and do add onto it , right ? that can happen if you know the background programming that they have used .see it s not an absolute must for everyone to know programming . but you to have an edge inyour respective subject programming is a must . be it you said you are from mathematicsbackground , physics background , economics , assume you are doing business a small scalebusiness still knowing how to write a piece of code and get things done comes a long way inhelping you to have that extra edge over others . right ! forget others to do something that isout of the box and out of the knob , you need to understand how to programming ,programming is one skill that helps you get things done really really fast , i am doing toillustrate this very soon with you people by using test cases , where you will realise thatwithout programming you can not imagine getting o things done .so i will give you a quick illustration on what is programming ? ok. i am going to programmeyou people right now , ok. look at this , i am going to show you my hand , if i show you in thishand , if i say this it means coffee , if i say this two it means tea , this is water . can we play thisgame now ? yeah yeah . coffee ! water , tea , water , coffee , tea , water . ok. let me add a twomore items to it . coffee , tea , water , juice , cookies . can you remember ? yeah . tea , tea , water ,juice , cookies , water , cookies , juice , tea , he is copying . ah ! juice , cookies , tea , ok. so let s adda small variant to this . you see what happened ? i told them to make these assignments for thesesymbols and they did the assignment . as i was showing them this numbers they could easilysay what they represent . how about this ? i will show the item using these fingers , whatevercoffee , tea , water , juice , cookie and in this hand i will show the number of coffee that i want ,number of coffee cups basically . if i say this , it means three cups of coffee , if i do this , quick !five cookies perfect ! shall we go ahead ? three cops of water , three cups of water . i think hehas not quoted right , let him do it , you remain silent ok ? oye ! i can t see from this side . twocups of juice , yeah ! two cups of juice where you took some time for me to figure out ok ! whatis this ? four cups of tea , very nice . one cup of tea , one cup of coffee , four cups of juice , twocups of ! ! two cookies , two cookies and so on . so what i just now did is like i programmed theirminds to follow a particular code line of thought and then they could figure out what i meanby this . what i meant by this and things like that . so whenever i show this to sowjanya it meanshelp me with two cups of tea , i am sorry four cups of tea . if i say this it means help me withtwo cookies . correct ! so on and so for so symbolically we can represent an item with somethingand i just programmed their minds to follow a particular rule . right ? ok. probably youwondering what has this to do with the programming ? i am just trying to get your minds startedon what one means by giving instructions . programming is all about that .so let s do one thing , so you all know the age old way of doing a paper boat , observe carefully . how isa paper boat done ? we take a sheet of paper ok ? a very clear to you people from this angle but i amsure most of u already knows how to make a paper boat . now imagine these two people are robots !they know nothing . do you know how to make a paper boat ? probably not ! no ! correct good . so iwill teach you step by step , you follow exactly what i do . firstly this is a rectangle , this is a rectangleright ? i wish to make a square out of it , how do i do that ? just follow whatever i am doing , we can keepit here . may be you can tear this , all that we did was we made this rectangle , a square . right ? bycrossing it like this and that s the way you make a square . right ? and simply do whatever i am gon natell you people . collect all the papers here , look at this , fold it once like this and fold it again like this ,simple ok. show it to everyone so that they can see what we are doing and then you see what shappening here , off course i am not going to teach you how to make a boat in this course but i am tryingto tell you people that we give instructions and people follow and we get things done . ok let s go aheadnow fold this like this take one leaf of this and fold it like this and the rest three leafs will be folded onthe other side . this reminds me of my school days ! so then u knew how to make a boat is it ? no theynever taught you , rarely i remember ok ! ok. good . so what you do is you can you should fold it likethis basically you should put your finger inside and fold it like this and you will get something like formof a kite and then pluck this out , pluck this out like this and you will get a boat . tada ! done ? all of you ,what is it that i did just now ? i instructed a couple of people here on how to make a boat and here wehave three boats . correct ? so similarly we probably can now make a plane out of paper or any origamiart , i do it , i give instructions step by step and you also do it . if you fail to understand my steps you willnot be able to get the boat as simple as that . so ! not the exact boat , u may get the some other shape oru may not end up u might end up u might end up not getting a boat finally ! right ? so what if we getstuck in middle and it s not opening it at all , you force it open it will tear ha ha ha , you will be tearinga sheet right ? so the point i am trying to make is by following a set of instructions he accomplishessomething that i ask him to accomplish , similarly your computer can actually understand yourinstructions , when you instruct the right way . imagine i instruct ! i tried giving this instruction in teluguor kannada or french or italian or some other language which you don t understand , you will not ableto accomplish it or if there are any ambiguity in the instruction you will not be able to accomplish it .right ? so what is important here is to talk and give instruction in a way that whether it s a computer ora human being you are instructing in a way that the other end the computer understand what you areinstructing . right ! any questions ? we didn t discuss anything to have questions oh go ahead ! i will justsum up so just told that whatever instructions we give for the other person it must be very clear , crystalclear . clear , ambiguous , is it to follow and he must be able to produce whatever you are trying to askhim to produce him or her ? right ? ok so this way we actually make a computer listen to you , take yourinstructions and then accomplish it and computers have a capability of accomplishing something reallyreally fast right .so trust me on this , most of your questions can be solved once we start programming . let usstart from their basics and try to build up one step at a time most of your questions can not beanswered in plain english although i have tried my level best to do that . you will realize thatthe best way to answer it is to experience it all by yourself . ok. so let us not get going withour programming journey with the very nice online package called scratch . this actually aprogramming language and trust me the pre requisites , the age from where one can start usingthis programming language is actually just eight . an eight year old can understanding thisprogramming language really well and trust me it s actually very addictive . look at this littlecat here and look at all the commands over here . you know these commands give this cat awhole lot of power and let s see what exactly are the powers that you can enable the cat toperform something right ? when you say move ten steps i think it s obvious for you all . themoment you say move ten steps she must moves ten steps ahead so let me say move tensteps ! move ten steps , she is not moving ! probably there something else i must do . what isthat ? so it is double clicking on the move steps that is what is going to make her moveand if you change the steps to steps , i type here it s going to make her movesteps . how ? not by just clicking on this once but click on this twice . a good thing to do ispossibly open this scratch window by going to scratch.mit.ed it is there in the description ofthis lesson and then you can try it all by yourself as i am trying it . so move steps shemoves . in another time move steps , she moves . let me say move times , steps shemoves steps . i am going to pull her by the tale and bring her back , ok so again movesteps , she moves . move move perfect ! and as you can see there are self explanatory stuffhere . turn degrees says a command , when i keep it here and double click on it look sheis going to move degrees . correct ? let me make her move completely right ? she moveshe move she moves and finally she comes back to her original state ok ? i can also move herin the opposite direction , i made her move clockwise , i can make her move anti clockwise ,look at this double click , double click , double click she is moving and double click this shemoves in the clock wise direction . go ahead steps , turn by degrees go ahead stepsturn degrees , go ahead steps turn by degrees go ahead turn turn turn turn turn turnturn and then go ahead , you see i can command her using these commands . she went back letme pull her back let me turn her she comes back to her original position . ok. what have youlearnt so far ? you have learnt the following . here is the cat and you can instruct her to movethe way you want , the way you want here is basically the set of command given here , some ofthem sound complicated but don t worry with time you will be able to understand almosteverything of what is given here . as of now we just learnt how to make her move ahead andhow to make her turn the way we want . let us end this lesson by making her turn by let s saydegrees so this will make her turn by degrees , right ? again let s say degrees and iam just typing it here and then again let s say degrees , degrees and so on right ? sonow it s time for you all not to go ahead with the next lesson but to open the scratch windowand try playing around with her and make her move around , turn around , and do whateveryou want . sky is the limit as you can see and its whole lot of fun making her do stuff ok ? youcan in fact explore other things here also , although we will be covering all these things it willbe good if you can go ahead and look at this mini laboratory of how to programme a smallunit graphical figure ? we just now made the cat rotate move around this was just thebeginning . you can do a lot more with the scratch then this let us see more of it in the forthcoming videos .we saw how we can make this cat move , rotate and things like that . now what i am gon natell you is what is called grouping these instructions ? some i am gon na group them youeasily guess what that mean ? basically i just zoomed the commands but it s easily visible foryou . what i am going to do is , i am going to make her move by steps and again moveback by steps , what is this mean ? clicking on this will make her move ahead , clickingon this will make her move back to her position it s like go ahead steps and come backby steps . right ? ok. and then let me say i want her to turn by degrees , so when iclick on this she turns by , again turns by , again turns by , and again turns by . sowhat i want her to do is let s say first move steps and then turn by and again move bysteps so i should bring back move once again keep it here make it steps and then turnby degrees . what will this do ? let me keep this aside . so when i double click on this shewill move back by but when i double click on this she will perform all this thingscontinuously , simultaneously ok , so let me just remove this , this is not required i double clickon it and click on delete . ok ? and it s gone . so when i double click on this , the first one shewill move steps , rotate by degrees and again move by steps ahead and then rotateby degrees , let us see whether this happens or not ? boom ! ! she comes here and then shesettles here , we couldn t we couldn t recognise what exactly happened right ? now if i clickon this once again she will move ahead by rotate move ahead by rotate and stop . seethat happened now . i click , she comes here , i click , she goes back the movement is so suddenbut we are unable to observe what s happening ? right ! so there is a way in which we canactually make her wait between the commands that is called if you click on control you willsee what is called wait here , you can insert wait she will move ahead wait for one second andagain rotate by degrees , i want her to move , i wanted to wait her for one second onceagain and then move steps and then again wait , ok now what will this do ? very simplesee most of scratch is self explanatory , i would say all these video lessons are not soimportant . what is important is you should experiment with what stand for what ? now let medouble click on this , let s see what happens ? self explanatory isn t it ? move by stepsmoved , waiting for one second move , rotate and stop ! i repeat , move by steps , rotate ,move by steps , rotate . even that i have given one second time this is happened . correct ?what do i want ? i want her to move ahead let s say by steps , what will happen rightnow ? she will move a whole lot , rotate , move just a little rotate and stop . so i want herto move steps always and go back to her original position . she went away somewhere !let me pull her back . so i wanted to start here move by steps , she is somewhere here ,rotate and then she will move , rotate and then she will move , rotate and then she will move ,she will complete a loop you see , she should get back to her original position . so what do ido for that , self explanatory i should again make her to move by steps , go to motion clickon it put move here move by steps i want her to wait for a second , so go to control andthen say wait for a second move by steps and then again rotate right ? you must againmake her rotate by degrees again i want a wait in between as you can see otherwise youcan not see her move , computer is very fast , the computer will make all these commands getexecuted in a fraction of a second you will not be able to see her move properly ok and againrotate by degrees , lets revise . she comes ahead , degrees she rotates , steps , shecomes down , degrees she rotates , steps she goes here , degrees she rotates andagain i must say move by steps isn t that right ? she should move four times , once shegoes straight , rotate and move she comes down , rotate and move she goes to the left , rotateand move she goes up once again control wait for a second tada ! there we are just doubleclick on this go , rotate , go , rotate , go rotate , go rotate . ahh ! she is not rotating because i amnot rotating here so what i should do that the end i must make her rotate once again , so rotateby degrees hip hip hurray ! ! we are done . wait for one second and this will make her dothe trick so but i will i will i am rotate her by degrees right now otherwise she will notstart from there , so i will create a new command just to rotate her by now we are all set ,bring her here and then double click on this , this is a separate command we can double clickand she will rotate like this once twice thrice four times as when double click on this , this willhappen but when you double click here move , rotate , move , rotate , move rotate , move andthen rotate is what s happening right ? these were the list of commands which made you writeyour first programme , a set of instructions for this cat to move and complete a square .remember the example of coffee , tea , of them , of them and things like that correct ! i gaveyou people instructions and you followed it remember ? coffee , tea , cookies ! cookiesand things like that right ? similarly i give him instructions , i give the cat instructions torotate to move ahead few steps and he does that ok. we just saw how we can group a bunchof commands ! and execute them in an instance . this is one of the most powerful concepts incomputers and especially one of the aspects of programming that is worth appreciates it . youcan write a long piece of code running through several consaflaince which will executesomething very quickly , let s say you click on your icon on your computer and theprogramme opens this particular thing is actually a piece of code , a long piece of code but itacts so instantly that you will not realise that it is so longer code that we double click and itgets executed in fraction of a second . fine , now we will go ahead and understand what arecalled the looping structures . if you want to get a bunch of things done repeatedly there is anice way of doing it in programming and let s see more of it in forth coming sessions .we are on to discussing something very significant , important and a novel concept for abeginner ok. what is our ultimate aim ? to make our cat recite five tables ok ? and now i amgoing to introduce you people on what is called a variable ? ok. that s what is the importantsignificant thing for a programmer i was talking about . go to data click on it , click on make avariable , it will ask you for a name put any name you want now here is a confusing part youcan put your name or you can simply put a letter you can simply enter whatever you wanthere , a word also let me simply enter s to begin with and click on ok , you will get a s here ,you saw the difference right ? correct ? now pull this aside and keep it here double click on ityou will get a , a variable is always unless otherwise initiated , what do i mean by that ? iwill tell you next , pull this this side it says set s to i will put here which means when youdouble click on this s actually becomes , double click on this s we are getting right ?also for your reference this shows , the variable value which is here correct ? ok. nowwhen i , let me tell you what is change . when i say change s by you will see what happens ,double click on it s changes by means s gets incremented by ok ? double click on s youwill see now , you also see here right ? if you say change s by let s say what willhappen ? the existing value will get added by , which makes it . you see you mustpractice a whole lot of handling variables , exercises you should try playing around just thisthing , just this much . make a variable and try to see what exactly happens ? let us do a smallexercises now let s go to data create a variable , let me call it x. create another variable , yesyou can do as many as you want call it y and you are done , you have x and y correct ? andlet me set the values of x and y , how do i set it ? you go here , you will get all the currentvariables that you have defined x , i will set x to something , y to something ok ? let me dothat and y will be let s say some ok ? you still see that x is , y is correct ? let mealso keep them here as you know , you can keep these here double click and then see whattheir values are ? it is . that is because i am not double clicked on this the moment i doubleclick on this , this two get executed so double click now x will be y will be as isevident here and also double click , perfect ! now what i want to do is add these twovariables , how do i do that ? go to operators you have an addition operator here , bring thathere and then go back to data , bring set here create another variable namely z you see what iam doing z gets created . what is z ? double click ok ? i am going to set z to be x y howdo i do that ? first put x here then put y here and then say set z to x y and bingo ! ! you seewhat s going to happen now ? double click on this z is now but double clicking on it willmake x , y , which already the case by the way and then will make z become equal toz y which is that should become here , should become , let s see what happens ? comehere and then double click boom ! see z became , z now is correct ? so you can do awhole lot of such operations here ok ? let s do more for the sake of explaining things to you . iwant to subtract also ok ? subtract what from what ? go to data subtract let s say x y ok ?double click on it you will get the answer but then if you want to set it on a new variable thenyou should use set let me call it a new variable , make a variable , let s say diff . diff getscreated please note variables need not necessarily be a letters it can even be words like thisstrings like this . so i am going to say set diff to be the difference so bring it here and thendouble click on it , now my difference will be x y whatever x was whatever y was thedifference will be diff perfect it showing and you want this to be sequentially executedsimply keep it here , now tell me what happens if i make x as and y as what willhappen to z ? it will be x y , z should become . x is , y is why is it showing andthat is because i am yet to execute these things . ok ? double click here and all these valueswill change . x should become , y should become , z should become sum of x and ywhich is and diff should become the difference which is what is it ? . correct ? wemust see , , and let s see if this is visible ? double click boom ! yes perfect ,and . so now you have understand how to set a variable to a value , perform a fewoperations assign the values to a new variable . ok ? go back to operators explore all thesethings look at data you can create variable and use them to do whatever you want . so whatwas our mission ? we wanted our cat to recite the five tables , how do we go about doing that ?let s see . first let me go to data and create a variable let me call it t t for tablesmultiplication tables ok ? and then i want to set t to and then i want t to change by everytime ok ? and i want my cat to say these , how do i make her say this ? say hello so say go todata take t and out that here so you are making t you change t by no ! i think before thatwe should make her say t and then you can change t by and then make her say t once againhow do i do that ? simply copy paste say t once again ok ? double click t set to and shesays t and then changes t by and then says t but this happen so fast you can not see afive come here , let me try it once again . oh see you can t even see because it gets executed soquick so what will i do ? i will go to control and i will say wait one second , with this you willsee that a comes here , you wait for a second so that you see it and then t changes by andthen t is again displayed which is let me see this , double click huh see comes and thencomes after a seconds time , double click and then so what should i do ? i want this torepeat , what to repeat ? wait for one second change t by and say t . right click on this andsay duplicate you will get the same thing keep it down this will now be , , if you knowwhat i mean . correct ? let me see double click , , good my cat can say tables up tois . let me make her say up to is how do i do that ? keep copy pasting thisbelow , right click duplicate , means you will get a duplicate of that keep pasting this belowlike this duplicate down , duplicate down , duplicate down , i have not kept a count of howmany times i am saying let me double click and check . , , , , , , , this is adumb cat as i told you she will only do what is being instructed , she is not intelligent enoughto understand that we want up to and she must go up to . unless and otherwise specifiedshe will not do it . so what need to be done now ? yes i must duplicate this just a couple oftimes and there i am , this makes it says of t which changes by every time and this mustmake our cat recite the tables from times is up to times is so basically you see, , , up to let see if she does it ! double click , , , , , , , , ,hip hurray ! ! ! there you are so we made our cat recite the table . so we made her recite thetable from , , up to i have a feeling there is a better way to do this and what is thatbetter way ? can you think ? can you try before proceeding any further ? it will be a goodexercise for you all . now if not i am always there to help you , maybe we want to pause hereand then try it to do it all by yourself , if not lets continue . go to control and then look at thisrepeat , keep it here and then simply take , let me duplicate this i don t want anything beyondthis ok ? let me delete this i only want i want a set t to to begin with and then repeat thistimes , repeat what ? i want to say t first is being said wait for about one second ok ? andthen again let me delete this i want the cat to say t after changing t by ok ? so see what i amgoing to do now change t by and then say t and wait for one second and i am done ! let medelete this and try explaining what i just did . t will be , cat will say we wait for onesecond and i then repeat this nine times ok ? which means i change t by which means tbecome i say , i wait for one second and this happens nine times which means i will goon and recite the entire thing , correct ? the same thing the same thing can be done in such asmall piece of code , do you see the power of this repeat loop here but let s see whether it doesor not ? double click and there we go , , , , , , , , , yes we did exactlythis bigger code equivalent by writing a small code correct ? ah is there any way i can evenbetter this code let me try bettering this code . all of you observe , i duplicate this i go here isimply want to repeat something ten times repeat what ten times ? i want the cat to say fivefirst so for that t and then i want this to be done inside , i don t want any of these things , letme delete these things see what this code does first sets t to and then repeats say t changeby and then waits for a second let me see whether it does what it is suppose to do . doubleclick , so on let see whether its stops at yes , , , . you are just wonderingwhy exactly i did this , this looks exactly similar to this even does what this does but this willgive me enormous amount of flexibility , and what is that . see what i am going to do i amgon na do small magic for you all . click on make a variable and create any i will type anyhere , any is now a variable ok ? and now i will set t to not but any and i will change t bynot but any and i will now set any to let s say pause the video observe the code , whatexactly this code does ? and then un pause play the video and see if you are right or not ? ok .i suppose you all pause the video and gave your guess now double clicking on this willsimply give me tables isn t it ? how ? let s see whether it gives me tables or not . doubleclick , , , , , , , and this gave me tables that because whatever wasgiven here i tried replacing by another variable which i could flexibly change , what do imean by that ? if you make this eight or nine let s say it gives me the table for nine look at thisdouble click and i will get tables for right ? , , , , , , and that is basicallytable in fact you can even make it recite th table which by the way i never learnt as a kid iknew tables only up to , i dint even know table but let me see whether it can recitetable very unfortunately i will not be able to verify given that i don t know by heart so this isgoing on i know we should stop on let me see . , perfect ! so i now can make thecat recite any table which even i dint learn as a school kid .we know performed one of the major tasks in programming called the looping , we told youhow we can make our cat reside the multiplication tables , well we made our cat do somemental exercise you see it is time for us to make her do some physical exercise . we will makeher move back and forth by using our programming skills . ok , friends see i have written avery long code , very patiently i have tried writing this code what exactly is this code ? look atthis , initially i am going to move twenty steps take a half a second break there and then comeback twenty steps , half a second pause go ahead forty steps see it s like first day cat movestwenty steps and comes back next it goes forty steps and comes back sixty steps comes backminus sixty steps , eighty steps and then comes back and so on as you can see so on so on , soon , move hundred , minus hundred move one twenty and then minus one twenty which meanscome back move one forty and then come back one sixty , one eighty , two hundred and thencome back as you would have guessed , if you have guessed this cat will now keep movingahead like this incrementally will get bolder and bolder and move away from her house , shewill try going as far as possible , let s see how this works by double clicking on this . doubleclick ahead back , back , ahead back go ahead back , go bolder and bolder go twenty stepsahead twenty steps ahead and finally stop once you reach two hundred steps . correct ? let sdo this once again and then watch one , two , three , four , five , six , seven , eight , nine and ten sotwenty steps , two hundred steps which is ten perfect , now i have a question for you all , she isdoing basically ten ahead s and ten backs in succession right , is there any way i can use arepeat loop and then put something so that the same thing can be achieved by making her bydo something ten times without going through this ordeal of writing this big of code , nowwhat am i trying to say , is there any way you can use this and reduce this to a smaller code ,because its looks like we are repeating the same stuff but these values are changing correct ?how do we go about it ? can you now figure out by looking at all the options here , if you cando this all by yourself , we strongly suggest that you spend at least fifteen to twenty minutestime figuring out , how you can achieve the same thing using the repeat loop , if you can notsolve it get back and continue watching the videos .so i hope you people tried doing what i asked you to do , right ? if you dint ? don t worry weare there to help you . how do we go about this ? here we are going to help you out withunderstanding of this really involved computer science concept . the question that i asked in aprevious video clip is not a very straight forward one , if you are not into programmingalready you should have found it very difficult to even understand what i was asking you todo . so don t worry listen to me careful , let s go step by step .firstly let me teach you what is this data thing here , click on it you will get these two things ,click on make a variable and you will get , you will ask you will be asked to type in a variablename , let me now type a variable name as a num click on ok. so you see a num gets createdhere it is assigned zero and also num sits here , pull it and keep it here double click on it youwill gets it value zero . so num is zero so i can set num to some number put this here , set numto ten when you do this and then execute this number is now ten you see its updated to tenhere and when you go here and double click on this it will say ten , it will say ten correct ?now when you say change num by one and execute that num initially was set to ten and thenyou changed it by one which means by one means what you incremented ten by one and youget eleven double click on num you will see eleven correct ? let us double click on this onceagain this is just like these are all blocks of instruction you are giving right ? num is equal toeleven why don t you double click on this ? i double clicked go back you will see twelve herecome back double click it becomes thirteen , double click fourteen , double click fifteen sowhat do i do ? look at this i will take go to this control and take a repeat loop and put thishere can you guess what s going to happen now ? i repeat num was fifteen and i am going tochange num by one ten times when i double click on this you see the computer is going tovery quickly execute this piece of instruction ten times no that is very certain thing we wantto pause the video and think what s happening here ? one even parallelly try doing whatexactly i am trying to do here right ? it s not so easy same time not very difficult it takes timesto this to sink it , i double click on this and you will see the magic happen , i double click numis fifteen now i am going to double click this , double clicking yeah i did it now immediatelythis became twenty five , why ? that s because num got incremented by one ten times , if imake this fifty then num gets incremented by one fifty times and so many double click onthis i mean to double click by the way but if i double on this num will get incremented byfifty which means this becomes seventy five let me see double click boom ! this becameseventy five now what is more beautiful about this , these thing happen really really fast howfast ? i put thousand here and you will see how quickly this becomes incremented bythousand , thousand num will get incremented one by one thousand times and hence thisshould become yes ! one zero seven five now ready lets double click , double clicked quicklythis became one zero seven five that why computers are very fascinating and programming acomputer is more fascinating because the power is in your hands to make it compute , itcomputes really fast , very very fast correct ? ok. so now let me do something i will set thenumber to zero ok ? this is the part of this code now let me remove this , this doesn t matter ,double clicking on it as i told you will show you the existing numbers value but that s therehere itself so we don t need to worry let me keep it here so i can see it properly and let meremove this , this is not useful now what will happen if i press this number will be assignedzero and then number will increment one at a time and will become thousand . these thingswill happen so fast that you will not even notice what s happening . double click here you seeit became thousand correct ? now let us go slowly and see what is happening here ? you willbe surprised that this is so easy to do , go to control go to wait and tog in wait here now youall know what is going to happen . right ? set number to zero change number by one wait forone second so you can peacefully see how these changes one by one with the seconds pausein between , all of you i am sure you would have guessed what this is going to do . let usdouble click and see what exactly it does , double click ! and here its starts one two three fourfive six seven and so on , you see this it s now incrementing it will go on like that till onethousand i don t have so much time so let me just stop this come back instead of thousand letwe make this just twenty and see what happens ? so double click on this once again one twothree you see this will go on till twenty , four five six seven eight nine ten you see as you cannote you are basically creating a counter which changed one number every second sobasically this takes twenty seconds . correct ? twenty ! ! there you are hip hip hurray ! ! so wewrote a first neat code correct so this is what loop does , it helps you it gives you the power torepeat something repeatedly for a designated amount of time . please note one thing that youshould do and another thing you shouldn t do , one thing you must do is you must pause andthen write your own codes try to play around not just do what exactly we did but do a lotmore than what we are showing , play around and use all these things and try to understandwhat is what ? you can always click on , let s say u dint understand what is wait for one secondright click on it you will get a help click on it and there you are , you get all the details aboutthat particular command wait specified number of seconds and continuous with next blockwith the example here correct ? let s close this so you should try doing this that is what youare supposed to do and what you are not supposed to do is simply stick to what we areexplaining you should not be doing that . we are using example to explain things so that wewill motivate you to explore more stuff so please go ahead and explore a lot more things herebefore going any further only then can you understand programming really well so let s getback to our original question . i was just going to teach you something that going to comevery handy in solving this problem , what problem ? the cat is trying to go ahead and comeback and then keep going ahead and keeps coming back and then it incrementally keepsmoving like this and it get s braver brave with time . right ? how do we programme that usinga repeat until loop ? how do we avoid writing a huge code for it ? remember ? it was goingtwenty steps at a time twenty first forty next and then back sixty next and then back so let ustry doing that using repeat until the repeat lopper ok so i will take this repeat lopper and thenput here and ten times i will make him go ahead , how do i do that ? motion move twentysteps , instead of twenty steps i will say twenty steps times one , twenty steps times two twentysteps times three , how do i do that ? i mean that sounds little complicated , let me figure thisout on scratch . how do i do this ? let me go to data , create a variable called steps , steps is thenumber of steps that the cat takes and yeah there you are ! steps gets created and initiallysteps will be twenty and then i am gon na change steps by increments of twenty which meanswhat does this do ? see what this does . we discuss this when you double click on this you seethis segment of code now is different , this segment of code is different when you double clickon this only this gets executed you all know that by this time correct ? so when i click on thisinitially steps gets assigned by twenty ok ? double click steps is assigned by twenty and stepsis changed by another twenty which is forty ok ? and next if i again continue to say changesteps by another twenty it becomes incremented by another twenty again if i say set oh i amsorry not set delete this change steps by twenty it will again get incremented by twenty ah !well once again i need to gave control wait for a second between stop so that i can see what shappening ? correct ? so what will this do ? all of you ? it s only obvious once i click on thissteps get to set to twenty go back see in one second it becomes forty one second sixty , onesecond eighty and then stops that s precisely what i want this code to execute and give me aoutput like this correct ? this is what i expected . and that s precisely what it doing that rightnow , correct ? now what if i put this in a repeat loop , what happens ? ten times this entirethings get s executed , what get executed ? that sounds very complex you see let me just keepit aside this is not using , we are not using this all though we will soon come to this cat goback ok. let me execute this . what will this give me ? repeat ten times this entire thing ,double click let me see twenty forty sixty eight , twenty forty sixty eighty is not visiblebecause i am not putting a waits , wait here let me put that here forty sixty eighty , twenty fortysixty eighty it keeps doing this ten times correct ? as simple as that but then what if i wantthis up to let s say thousand ? how do i do this ? i initially set steps by twenty and wait for asecond and change steps by twenty and then let me remove this things and put a wait here butthen i will not set this to twenty here itself see what i am doing slowly and patiently i will setsteps to twenty but then repeat this ten times so that it keeps incrementing twenty at a timewhat does this do ? let s see double click on this you will see twenty forty sixty eightyhundred and so on hundred and twenty hundred and forty hundred and sixty and one eightyand finally two hundred correct ? two twenty oh its goes on its ten times right ? so its lastone is actually two twenty we start with twenty so its two twenty , figure this out look at thiscode and see what it does it simply starts from twenty and ends in two twenty , what is themotive ? what exactly am i doing ? i have to move this cat incrementally right ? of what use ofall these things ? now we are going to use this , we are going to use this and make this catmove the way we want her to move let s go back to this repeat and keep it here and what do iwant the cat to do ? i want basically a variable sets steps to twenty to come here sets steps totwenty and then what ? i want her to move twenty steps ahead ok , instead of twenty i want toput steps here , what do i mean by steps here ? i will take steps here and put this here pleasenot what i am doing , is a need thing in scratch , nice facility in scratch . you set steps to twentyand you move twenty steps , first just execute this , lets see what happens ten times click shekeeps moving ahead , that s what is expected with the pause of one second what happensnow ? pull her back , what happens now ? double click , she moves ten steps , ten steps , tensteps steps is twenty move by twenty steps and then wait for a second ok ? keep doing this ican consider doing the following keep this here and then keep this here so that you set stepsto twenty and then move twenty steps and then wait for a second move twenty steps correct ?i was assigning steps to twenty here every time that s not required initially if you assign thatshould be enough , double click ahead twenty twenty twenty twenty twenty so on ten timeslet s watch her walk twenty twenty and then she stops of ten moments correct ? now what dowe want ? we want her actually go by twenty steps and come back by twenty steps you see sonow what i should do ? is i should go back motion move twenty steps steps ahead and moveback a few steps . please note the steps is a built in thing here i mean by that i mean stepshere means the cat should move so many steps we are also calling the variable steps heredon t be confused about it right ? these two are actually different things here ok. so now shemust move back by twenty steps how do we do that ? go to operators there is very nicefacility here what is that ? i can do multiplications of two things correct ? i want to multiplyminus one with data and take steps put that here i can multiply steps by minus one what do imean by that ? if steps is twenty steps times minus one is minus twenty so i make her moveminus twenty steps so twenty steps ahead and twenty steps behind when i click on this , let meremove all these things these are not required we delete them ok , when i double click on thisyou see what happens , she keeps going back and coming forward , going back and comingforward you can put a second pause here to make her go ahead come back go ahead comeback she will do this ten times come back , up come back twice up come back four five sixand so on correct ? ok. so she is doing ! we are almost there but what exactly , you rememberwhat exactly we wanted her to do ? we wanted her to go ahead twenty steps , come backtwenty steps go ahead forty steps next . so so so ! what do i do ? come back to data think ishould use change steps by twenty ok , people this is where the place where things are gettingslightly complicated and i tell you the reasons why it s getting complicated ok it s because asi am going slightly fast off course it is the lecture videos but you have to liberty to pause thevideo and think about what i am saying , if you don t do that i will be going on fast and fastright ? so based on your taste and paste you may want to pause the video and then try yourselfhow exactly you can make this cat move ahead and come back an incrementally keep doingthis so what is this go to set steps by twenty repeat this ten times move steps number of stepsthat steps is actually twenty so move twenty steps , steps is a same twenty , so move twentysteps wait for a second and move twenty steps in reverse direction minus twenty steps pauseand then change steps by twenty means , steps is no more twenty it becomes forty here andthen come back and start from here , you see i don t again assign steps twenty here i comeback here and then i continue . what is steps now ? is actually forty . so wait for a second youwill move for forty wait for a second and then you move back by forty and so on and you willbe surprise to see that this is precisely what we wanted our cat to behave like . double clicktwenty ahead twenty back , forty ahead forty back , sixty ahead sixty back , eighty ahead eightyback , hundred ahead hundred back one twenty minus one twenty one forty minus one fortyone sixty minus one sixty one eighty minus one eighty two hundred minus two hundred nowthat must tiring right ? but the cat doesn t get tired simply because it s a computer programmeyou can make her move the way you want her to move ok ? now can you play around thesenumbers here and make her move really fast and many numbers of times i leave it to you .so let s do one thing , you can in fact take some other object here not necessarily a cat . howabout taking an aeroplane and making it take off , take off exactly it will go for some time onthe ground and then take off , go for some time in air and then land let s say , how would youdo this ? make it move forward , ok ! chase the angle of the aeroplane gradually may be andmove it straight perfect . and then again change the angle , change the angle perfect right andmove it straight , straight ! i also told you it should also land and then rotate it again , rotateback and then land it down , land it down you must ensure that you don t land like this ,gradually come like this and then go ahead ok ? shall we try to see if we can do it or not ?yeah . ok perfect .so let us try to build the programme for aeroplane taking off and then landing so first of allwhat we need do here is , we have cat as the sprite here and we need aeroplane ! so how canyou do that ? in scratch you have many different options of sprite , here you can go to newsprite you can choose any sprite from the library , so i will just do that just click on it and seehow many sprites do you have ? you can choose any one , any sprite that you want so heresince we need aeroplane , i will just click on it you just double click and you will get spritehere on your scratch screen , now we have aeroplane and cat sprite here so we need onlyaeroplane so i will just delete the cat sprite here just right click on the sprite and select optiondelete . so here is the aeroplane and i want to reduce it size since it won t fit into the screen ofscratch so i just you can even increase the size of the sprite as well as decrease the size of thesprite and now but i want to shrink it so i will just use shrink there are two options here asyou can see , one is grow and another is shrink so i will use shrink here just choose it andclick on the sprite and yes it is shrinking so here we have the sprite . yeah ! i think this is theperfect size for the aeroplane that it can fit into our screen ok , so i think you know how theaeroplane takes off and then land let us try to build the programme for this , scratchprogramme for this . so first of all , what do we need to do here is ? we have to move theaeroplane on the run way yes ! we have to move the aeroplane on the run way so i will justclick on the motion category and we have move options so first of all i just click here moveten steps ok so maybe i want to move it twenty steps or fifteen steps say so let us try to dothat , it is just moved fifteen steps but since we need aeroplane , we need to show aeroplanerunning on the run way i will use move with the delay options , how can you do that ? so firstof all i will just say move five steps and then i will insert a delay and then move ten steps andinsert delay and then move ten steps insert delay and this way you can see the aeroplanemoving on the run way , i will just show you what is the difference , here if i just enter movefifteen steps here we have it will just move fifteen steps but if i enter move five steps andthen insert some delay and then i insert one second delay and after that i insert move ten stepshow will it move ? let us see ? here move five steps , move ten steps here you can see theaeroplane moving and it looks good to see the aeroplane moving this way on the run wayrather than just having fifteen steps in one go so for that you have to insert a delay , how canyou insert delay ? with wait option and where if the wait option ? wait option will comes inthe control category , in control category you have wait one second ok in this way you canmake the aeroplane move on the run way , first of all , we have to move the aeroplane on therun way and that is done , so what is next thing to do ? then we have to rotate the aeroplane ,yes by some degrees so here we have turn fifteen degrees so i will just use this option i willjust say turn fifteen degrees here since it has to rotate on the left side i will just use this optionhere you will have to move , you have to turn the aeroplane by fifteen degrees after that i willagain like to insert a delay so , i will just insert wait one second after that it should move somesteps so i just write move ten steps yes so let us have a look how does , how does it look likehere in scratch ? first one move five move ten then rotate and then move ten steps yes , it lookperfect ! so let me try to run it again so that you get the clear idea of , how it is functioninghere , first of all move five then ten then rotate then again move ten , yes this looks perfect .this is how aeroplane should take off , yes . so here we have the aeroplane taking off after thatthe plane was the plane is rotated by fifteen degrees ? after that what we can do here is , wecan move it by some steps , you can move the aeroplane by say hundred steps for that whatyou have to do here is ? for that i will again like to insert a delay here so let us insert thedelay here and wait one second and then i will again go to the motion category and i have torotate , i have to move the plane by hundred steps , so instead of ten you have to write hundredhere ok ? now we are done with rotating and moving the aeroplane in the air ok , once it hasreached the position let us try to run this piece of code . it rotates and then it moves ten stepsand then it moves hundred steps , so now our aeroplane is in air , now again what should wedo , we should rotate it by fifteen degrees , so again we have to rotate the aeroplane by fifteendegrees for that i will again insert a delay here so that it looks kind of real and now i have torotate it , so last time we rotated it left hand side now we will rotate it to the right hand side .so we will use this option , turn fifteen degrees after that what should we do ? we shouldmove the aeroplane by some steps in the air after it has been rotated so just take move tensteps , after that again insert delay , wait one second so i will just run this piece of code so thatyou can get the clear idea of what is happening over here , yes . so let us try to run it , movefive steps move ten steps and rotate then move ten steps and then again hundred and thenrotate and then move ten steps , this is how aeroplane is working here . now we have theaeroplane in the air , it is moving in the air for that to make it look real what you have to dohere is , we have to move it by say twenty steps and then wait for some time then movetwenty steps and then wait for some time i will insert this code again and again so that itlooks real that the plane is moving in the air so let us do that . i will just write here move saylike no no no ah this is wrong , here i will just write move twenty steps then wait for onesecond then move twenty steps again and wait for one second ok i will insert it again movetwenty steps and then wait for one second ok once more we have to insert it , move twentysteps and then wait for one second ok so now our aeroplane is moving in the air ok ? let ustry to run this piece of code , so that you can get the clear idea of what is happening , movefive steps move ten steps then turn and move ten steps and move hundred turn move tentwenty twenty twenty twenty so it has moved twenty steps four times , that means it hasmoved eighty steps ok , now we have to in order to land the aeroplane we have to again rotateit so , i will just use the option of rotate here , what we have to do here is we have to turn theaeroplane by fifteen degrees again so we have to turn the aeroplane again by fifteen degreesso i will just use it , turn by fifteen degrees and then move ten steps also with that after thatyou should wait for one second , wait for one second say and then what we have to do here iswe have to move the aeroplane down in the downwards direction , so you have to move theaeroplane down , so i will just move the aeroplane by some , by some steps here so i will justwrite move say fifty steps here , after it has moved fifty steps here then you have to againrotate the aeroplane , after it has moved fifty steps you have to again rotate the aeroplane sowhat do we need to do with that ? for that we have to use the turn option so then as an alwaysinset some delay and then use the turn option you have to turn it by fifteen degrees and thenyou have to move ten steps again and then wait for some time after it has rotated now it is onthe run way again because it is landing , since it is landing then you have to move it by somesteps , it is your choice how much steps that you want to move here , i will just use wait i justuse move ten steps here and then wait for one second , wait for one second then again i willmove it by ten steps so let us try to run this again and see how this aeroplane is taking off andlanding so it goes up in the air then it moves there for some time and it rotate and comesback , see we did a mistake here while taking off we moved it by hundred steps but whilelanding it is only moving by fifty steps , so what we will do , i will again insert move here andthis time i will move it by fifty steps so that it looks real and again you have to insert a delayso that it doesn t appear has crashing on the ground so again will run it , double click and runyeah it is going ahead in the air then straight for some time about eighty steps then it hascoming down and then again come down and now it is on runway ok , so this is how you canmake the aeroplane take off and land in scratch through a scratch programme but you can seethat there are many repetitive instructions here , we are using for example here we are rotatingit by fifteen degrees then moving it by ten steps and again we are using this code again andagain so what we can do here is we can actually group them in a repeat loop . i hope you arealready familiar with the loop concept here so what will we do , we will group the repetitiveinstructions here so that it becomes easy for us to write the programme and the programmebecomes short so what we will do here is for the repetitive instructions we just we will justgroup them in one loop , i will just use the repeat loop here for example here we have movefive steps then wait then move then turn then wait move then move by hundred steps and waitso we can t insert a repetitive loop here because here we are moving by ten steps and in thenext step we are moving by hundred steps then turn then move , move , move wait move waithere we can insert a repeat loop here because we are moving twenty steps four times so wecan insert a repeat loop here and we can repeat it four times this set of instructions movetwenty steps and then wait for one second after that we have to move turn then move thenmove move turn and then move and then we have to move again and again so ah i will justinsert a repetitive loop here , a repeat loop here four times in place of this instructions so whatwill i do is , i will just copy this but we have to do just duplicate it and keep it here so i willjust insert a repeat loop here in place of move twenty and wait one second ok ? so what will ido here , i just take this loop and what we have to do , we have to repeat it four times yes andyou can now delete this and insert it here so let us now , see how this programme withrepetitive loop works . so let us see , it is moving then again in the air then straight one twothree four yes perfect then it is coming down and then landing yes ! ! so as you see thisprogramme is same as this programme but the length is somewhat shorter because we used arepeat loop here , so let us now get back to sir and see what is happening in the other end .so you people saw that we could make a cat move . scratch gives you a whole lot ofpossibilities in fact , i can make you people move , you want to see how ? yeah . so what wewill do is , we will take a picture of ravi kiran and make him do exercise by writing a piece ofcode . in fact you will be , you will just give me two poses i will take a picture of these twoposes and then i ensure that i make you move around so much it looks like you areexercising . ok ? get up let s take a picture .hello everyone in the video we saw that we took the photo of ravi s so that we can create asimple scratch programme there he is exercising . so we took two photos of him let me showyou , these are the first photo he is standing and the next photo he is waving his hand , hishands are one eighty degree and his legs are stretched . see we are going to use these twoimages to create simple exercising programme . so we make ravi jump and exercise usingthese two images . so let s see this so what i will do this is my , i opened my scratch profile ,you can see that there is a sprite ok ? which is the default sprite sprite that is a cat instead ofthis i need ravi s picture so that i can use it so attaing to we will hide this you can right clickon it and hide this hide this sprite and here you can see there is a upload button you canupload your own images and create sprite from there so i will upload the ravi s image one isthis ok ? you can see since this image is rotated in left side and i need to rotate it ninetydegree ninety degree right foot that i will go to the info you can see there is a i icon i will gothere and i will rotate it tats it . ok. this is done , let me hide it for time being let me uploadthe next image this is there again this is also rotate it ninety degree left and i need to rotate itninety degree right i will go to the info rotate it ninety degree this is done . let me show thisok ? so what i am doing them is hiding it showing it hiding it showing it so when i do you cansee that it looks like exercising or getting to different different position see so it looks like aanimation if i do it little bit fast then it will look like he is actually exercising so we cancreate such kind of animations through images , this is what actually animators do , they createdifferent still images and then they play it in a very high frame rates so that it looks like theperson is moving in the actually moving looks to our eyes that the person is actually movingso this is exactly what we are going to do so i will be using this sprite only so whateverfunction i am going to put on this sprite only this the second image so what i will do i thinkyou got in tuition what i am going to do . now i will create a repeat block here ok , what i willdo i will go to motion let me check where are the show ok ? show and hide is there so firsttime we will hide this image ok ? and after this i will show the image let me let s try this i amgoing to do this for ten times ok. it looks like nothing is happening but actually so manythings are happening but since there is no delay in the between it looks like he is on still bit itwent too fast that it look that he is in single position so what i am going to do , let me firstshow and then hide , ok so what i am going to do , i am going to put a delay let me see whenthe delay ok wait after showing wait for one second and after hiding also wait for one secondok , now let s see awesome ! great ! so this is all what we are going to do , so it looks like thathe actually , he is exercising but we all know that by using the images we did this , he dint doanything so such kind of animation is easily possible in scratch and you can do a lot of thingsin scratch by set simple , simple techniques which people know so you can create your ownanimation you can create your own series of images you can have series of images you canhave beautiful animation through this . you can download this scratch also for example , i amusing this offline you can see this offline scratch editor , so you can download this scratchtools in your pc and you can use it offline also thank you .ok , that was so much fun seeing ravi kiran workout , ravi kiran i think you should not playthis animation for the mornings exercise replacements definitely i will use that only ! i don tthink you will lose any calories if you keep watching them , you probably gain calories sowhat you should do is maybe , you should use it as a reflection motivation he looks soenergetic when he does the jumping jacks you see , so when you do jumping jacks you mightlose out energy after two or three minutes but if you play the animation the energy looksintact may be , it can see as your mirror reflection and you can work out , you should try doingthat ok , how about you doing an exercise problem right now ? why don t you do what iscalled knee rise , a knee rise is you should lift your left knee put it back and then a right kneeit will look like stationary jogging ok ? one ! another one sis you should try moon walkinganimation for moon walking , you know what is moon walking ? have you seen michaeljackson do a moon walk ? moon walk is about walk , it appears as though you are walkingforwards but you will actually be moving backwards ok , try taking a couple of pictures andtry making it appear as though you are moon walking second exercise .who said programming is for geeks ! ? we just now illustrated that the programming is somuch fun right ? we saw a friend of ours doing jumping jacks we made him do repeatedly andwe also saw how we can make a flight land and take off right ? so we will see one more funexercise before we stop our adventure scratch .hello guys , hope you would have seen a lot of fun filled activities that you can do usingscratch , so you would have seen jumping jacks recently that is nothing but we are using sometwo different images and we are alternating displaying them in a smart way that it appear tothe user that the person is actually jumping , so something like that you can do a lot of coolstuff , sir has given you some exercises i suppose , please do try them also do explore stillwhat all could be done , you use your creativity do a lot of stuffs and this is how you canimprove your logical listening and the ability to get things done using a computer . so pleasedo explore scratch to the fullest possible and in this programming screen cast we would seeyet another fun activity , we are not going to use this cat in this i hope you had used the cat alot you had made her do a lot of work so let me say this cat must be hidden , so i will hide her ,so in looks category you have an option hide let me say hide and say double click on it , sheis hidden done ! so if not cat what am i going to use ? so i am trying to stimulate eaglecatching a snake , so this is what i am trying to stimulate , for that we need to check out thesprites for eagle and snake , some sprites are available in the library from scratch or you canalso draw your a new sprite as per your wish or if you have an image file something like thatyou can upload it or you can readily take from your web cam as well . these are the optionsprovided in scratch , i have an image file i am going to upload it because in this library i hadchecked animals category eagle snake is not provided in this library , so i am going to useimage that i had taken from the internet ok , so let me that is available in my system right nowso let me go to it and let me download , i had downloaded and kept it so let me take thatimage , eagle ok and open it ok so i want the eagle to be positioned here so eagle would beflying in the sky right ? so this gives an illumination that the eagle in the sky so i hadpositioned it here so roughly the co ordinates you can say one eighty six , one eighty nine solet me set it so that the eagle comes , if you want to repeat the exercise again and again theeagle comes back to this position and starts flying from this position , let me set the positionfor the eagle , set x to one eighty six ok , and set y to one twenty nine or may be slightlyabove one thirty ok ? so given that i have set so eagle has come to this position see one eightysix , one thirty two eagle has come to this position and i wanted to catch a snake , so wewanted a snake that is happy that is happily lying on the ground , the eagle has spotted thesnake while flying and so it flies down , it will fly down and come and catch the snake . that iswhat we wanted , so let us upload the image of the snake , for this the snake is very happythat s what i said let me show you the image as well , first let me show you the image i guessit s better if i can show you the image ok , so here in downloads i have it ok , so smile and crythere are actually two images see this is the image of the snake , see the snake is smilingright ? so the snake has been smiling and happily lying on the ground so when the eaglecatches the snake it shouldn t remain happy , it should cry so when the eagle catches the snakewe should make it cry , so but how can we make it cry ? same old trick that we used injumping jacks we will have another image of a crying snake and we let that particular snakeappear when the eagle catches this snake and this snake would be hidden , this is what we aregoing to do . it will be clear as the programme proceeds , if you don t clearly understand whati am telling now it will be clear don t worry please observe it this is the smiling snake imagethat i had downloaded and another is a crying snake image ok let me , see the snake has beencrying you can see the tears flowing from here . the snake has been crying see the snake iscrying alright ? so i am going to use these two images , i have to upload the images so let meclick this icon to upload it from the file so my first is the smiling snake tats what i wantsmie.png file let me upload it so this particular snake , snake , i want it here see we had set theposition for the eagle that is not visible when we click on the snake so please do understandthat scratch treats each of the sprites as independent objects so when we want this particularsnake to do something on the event of the eagle we need to use something on the event of theeagle doing something , we need to use the options given under this category events so in thisprogramming screen cast you will learn about the options given here , how to make use ofthem this will be major take home lesson out of this programming screen cast ok ? so this isthe position we want our snake to be ok ? let me say this is our snake , this is in positionminus one seventy nine minus one twenty nine so let me set it set x so that y do i set theposition because in case if you want to repeat the experiment you can not every time adjustthe snake adjust the eagle to ask it to do as you wish , you wanted to get adjustedautomatically you want to adjust once and set it once it is set that has to get adjustedautomatically that is what you want them to do right ? so that is why we are setting it , so x isminus one seventy nine and y is minus one twenty nine so set y to minus one twenty nineso if you don t understand how the coordinates are being set please you can refer here thepositions are shown here may be i will this particular portions , this particular place you cansee the coordinates . ok ? so please note the coordinates minus one seventy nine and minusone twenty nine and this is the position we want our crying snake also to come so let meupload the crying snake to the name is cry.png this one let me upload it so crying snake hasappeared here so let me set the position minus one seventy nine and minus one twenty ninelet me set them set x to minus one seventy nine and set y to minus one twenty nine initiallyi don t want the crying snake to be , see now the smiling snake and crying snake are in thesame position so it is imposed one above the other , super imposed so i don t want the cryingsnake to appear now so let me hide it hide options is available in the looks that you wouldhave seen in the cat right ? let we don t need it so we had hidden it so let me hide it so nowlet me double click ok so the crying snake is hidden now alright . so now we have to startanimating with the eagle so let us say the snake is happily lying on the ground the eagle hasspotted the snake it has to fly down and catch the snake , so how would you instruct it to flydown ? move few steps it keeps moving in the straight line it can t hit the snake so it has tomove few steps slightly change its direction again move change its direction move change itsdirection this is how the eagle has to fly , this is how we have to instruct the eagle to fly , so letus do that . so in motion category we have this thing move ten steps for the eagle please notethat all these instructions we are giving for the eagle so eagle so you can see the blue boxaround the eagle which denotes that this particular instruction are given for the eagle spriteok ? so move ten steps then i need to move in this direction so this would be approximatelyyou go thirty backwards in the x axis and ten backwards in the y axis that is the direction iwanted , this is just an approximation let us see how it works in cast if it doesn t works howwe wanted we can adjust the parameters any time , this is just approximation an eyeapproximation that s it so and also note that this may differ with respect to the images , i hadtaken some images if you have some other image the based on the image dimensions of howmuch space it takes , based on that this image is a smaller image so it takes less space so forthat these parameters may work but for any other image , if you take depends on that imageparameters may change so it s better you can , you try once and then you finalise the codethat s what i am going to do now to so i am asking it to move ten steps see it moves ten stepssee it moving in the backward directions so i need to ask it to come here so i should say tochange your x position you move change your x position and y position this is what i amgoing to say , change your x position by this is your visual approximation i guess minusthirty and change your y position by minus ten i feel this would be better let us check how itgoes ok yeah its approaching towards the snake see its approaching towards the snake so ikeep clicking for each click it displaces by some amount of distance so i just , i need to userepeat loop so that it approaches here till the snake so let me use a repeat loop control repeatten times , let me try with ten times so let me again restart . i set the eagle to the initial positionnow let me repeat it ok , it has come half way so let us give a try for twenty times ok , let usgive it a try now . it is in its initial position and let us give a cry , oh it is crossing the snake solet me try nineteen times because for ten it is not very closer to the snake and for twenty it iscrossing . so i am slowly decreasing the value from twenty but it is just a hit and try last . i hadsaid it depends totally on the image whatever image you have downloaded based on that thethings may change that s why even i am showing you the hit and trial method . ok so i had setthe eagle to the initial position let me execute this ok so it has touched the snake , no ! notfully right ? this portion , this portion has to touch this is just the tail part has touched thesnake so what should i do now ? the x position is perfect y position it has to come slightlydown that is the tail portion is touching the snake it has the eagle has to come down so that itcan completely touch the snake , so i have to make it come down , to make it come down ishould change the y value y position means the y position controls whether it has to goup or down if you give a positive value it goes up for a negative value it goes down , similarlyx position is for left and right if an x is given in an negative scale the object will move tothe left and for the positive value it will move to the right . this is how the working is so iwant it do come down so i should give a negative value of y let me say i will experimentthis is purely an experiment so let me experiment change y by minus ten how far it moves ,let me see ok , change y by minus ten ok ? let me again restart it is set to its initial position , letme repeat . ok perfect i guess now it s perfect or shall we move still down we will try , ok letme make it minus twenty ok , it is set to the initial position let me repeat ok perfect it is now itcan easily bend down and take the snake that s it means the snake is much reachable to theeagle currently so this position is perfect , so eagle has been moving like this so based on this ,this snake has to cry so how will we do that ? we have to hide the smiling snake and make thecrying snake appear , that is what we are going to do , so but in jumping jacks and here what isthe difference is in jumping jacks you had the alternating of pictures after few seconds so it isalternated in a cycle something like that you had , you waited for sometime it has alternated ina cycle but here the appearance of another image depends on some other event so eventmanagement is what we are going to do so when the here we have set the kite ! set the eagleready to fly so let me say it has to pass a message , broadcast a message that is it has to pass amessage but it has been it is flying so let me broadcast the message i can create a newmessage i will say flying so the eagle will broadcast a message that i am flying somethinglike that so it is broadcasting the message that i am flying so given that it broadcasting themessage only then the smiling snake has to come . and the crying snake has to be hidden ifthe message , broadcast message has been received so let us first configure that , it should notremain hidden if you so this it will remain hidden forever we want it to be hidden only till itis flying , till the eagle is flying the snake is unaware of the eagles arrival so it is smiling oncethe eagle has reached closer to the snake , only then that it starts crying only then the cryingsnake should appear till that it should be hidden , so when it is flying this crying snake has tohide that is what we wanted so when it is flying ? how do we do that ? yeah we have a blockwhen i receive flying so the eagle has been telling right i am flying so when it has been flyingthe crying snake sprite can be hidden so this is achieved here and the smiling snake has to beshown if it has been flying means when the eagle has been flying in the sky , the smilingsnake is not aware of it so it is happy so the smiling snake has to be sure so let me say when ireceive flying when the smiling ! the message flying is sent the smiling snake has to beshown so let me say show from the loops . so when it starts flying it sends out a message thati am flying so in that stage the snake is unaware of the eagle approaching it has to smile thatis why the smiling snake sprite we had set it has , when i receive flying message it should beshown , i have to be shown and for the crying snake it is an opposite , if it is flying then noneed for the snake to cry , if it is flying in the air so this has to be hidden so we have set it hereok then ahh when the snake touches the eagle sorry i am sorry ! when the eagle touches thesnake the snake has to start crying so this snake has to disappear the smiling snake has todisappear and the crying snake has to appear so when it touches , how will these two come toknow ? if it is a living object they would know that someone is being touched , disturbing usall these they know they would react but here we have some images that s it we are makingthe image behave as it is a real object so . how would we get things done here ? so for thatagain same like how flying message have been sent we need to sent out another broadcastmessage if this particular thing is touching this thing , so for that let me see touch is undersensing yeah ! this colour is touching this colour something like that we have an optionmaybe we can use it if this colour is touching this colour let us use that , if some conditionthen that block we will use it now , we will use it so if some condition , the condition is if thecolour is touching this colour so the colour you can change it , how would you change it is ?you click on it and just check which colour you just wanted to appear , just click there youwould get that colour see this colour is this the brown appeared here and now this colourshould be this one ok green appeared here ok let us bring this , i am fitting here ok , if thiscolour is , if the brown colour touches this colour then it has to send out another message sofor that again we are using the broadcast option but this time the message is not it s flying ,you have to send a new message so may be for the situation i will use trapped , so if it issends out a message trapped this snake will have to disappear , and the crying snake has toappear so i will configure it here , the smiling snake have to say when i receive trapped ithas to be hidden , so hide ok so we have configured the smiling snake let us go ahead with thecrying snake when i receive trapped its trapped this has to be shown so the crying , snake willcry but still will the eagle leave the snake ? no , it will eat the snake , so let us wait for sometime till the eagle eats the snake , so let us give a wait , wait for one second , one second islesser for a living eagle but this is a computer image for this one second is too much so onesecond would be enough it would eaten the snake so after one second this has eaten the snakethe snake that would appear should disappear so again i will give a hide option , a hide optionalright so hmmm i hope you are clear here if the crying snake has got means when themessage trapped has been sent that is when it will be sent ? when the particular colour , thisportion of the eagle touches this portion , that is the eagle has touch with the snake so when ithas touched the trapped message will be sent and because of the trapped message the smilingsnake would disappear and the crying snake would appear , which makes the user fevered dueto the eagle now caught the snake the snake is crying . so the crying snake would appear eventhough the snake cries eagle would not leave it , it would definitely eat that snake so this iswhy we are given a wait loop , it cries but still the eagle is merciless it eats the snake and afterit has been eaten the snake should not appear here that s why we are hiding it . so now hereafter it has been trapped the eagle will be happy that it has got a food so we need a soundeffect there right ? so let us have a sound effect , sounds you have an option here let s see ifwe have something from the sound library something you can record it with your microphoneor if you have a sound file you can upload it as well these are the options available here . see ,from the library animal i don t have a eagle sound so that is why i had taken an eagle soundthat i will be using it , i have a sound file basically i will be using it , you can get the eaglesound from the internet as well you can use it so eagle.mp this is my sound file let me openit and show you how the sound is , i will play , this is how the sound of the eagle will be henceit has caught the prey so that we are going to use it here so we have loaded the sound into ourproject ok once it has sent out a message that it has trapped it , it has to happily give the soundthat it has got the food so we have to insert a sound , play sound eagle ! yeah you have anoption let us use it here , it will play this sound . so after it has played this sound the cryingsnake would appear and it will eat the snake and once the snake has been eaten that snakewould disappear also the eagle would come back to its original position that is what wewanted to be done , so we have to wait for it to be eaten so once it is eat it has eaten the snakeit will rest for some time and then it will fly back right ? so let us give the wait loop butslightly more time than the snake , snake had got one second waiting time , that is one secondit has eaten and one second let it take rest let me say wait for totally two seconds so there is await loop and once the wait is over it will again fly back so all these i have in pieces so thisparticular thing is nothing but i will create a blocks for it so i will say fly , fly is a block sothis is my fly block and this i could say as target , target ok ! so this would be my target blockand or maybe i could club these two because if it is targeting it will come near the snake andit will stop that will never happens right ? it will bounce opens the snake and it will eat it so ican club these two blocks as well so this is my target this is the flying part and this is thetargeting of the snake part sp these are the two parts so now let me use these blocks initiallythe eagle has to been shown let me say show then it starts flying then it aims at the target thenonce it has eaten the snake it is satisfied it will go away so that i am denoting by height thatis , it has gone away , it has gone out of the frame so it has gone somewhere so i am hiding itso basically this is what i am trying to do this is the portion of smiling snake and the cryingsnake , ok let me check this how it works ? let me double click on this particular block whichinstructs it , wow ! that was so good let me show once again , is the flying too fast ? do youfeel that some more delay could be better so that you can feel that it is actually flying , it lookslike the eagle is running ! so maybe we can insert a delay , this is the computerised image soobviously the speed of the computer is much higher than what ! other living beings are sodefinitely it would look as it is running so let me insert a delay so that appears as it is flying ,one second is too much delay so let me use the delay loop but ok , let me say wait for pointone second , that is better i guess zero point one seconds let me wait and now let me again runthis , let me double click wow ! now you could see that the eagle was flying just observe onesecond the eagle is flying it has touched the snake , the snake cry , still it ate the snake and thenonce it is satisfied the eagle has also gone . see it doesn t wait for me to given description ,computers are so fast ok still we will try once again eagle is flying got the snake , snakecrying , eaten eagle is flown fine ! wow this is so nice you can try in more creative versions ofthis as well you can do a lot of things with scratch please do explore a lot this would improveyour logical reasoning ability and thanks for watching this screen cast have a nice day ! thatwas again a lot of fun ! did you see how you could pick different pictures and make eaglecatch a snake and then go forward right ? so you can actually animate , have your ownanimations , put people over there and then create a story out of it , any more questions inmind ? sir any one can create animations ? absolutely yup , you can create a animation made avideo out of it and put it on you tube as well , you should probably try doing that , you haveany other challenging exercise in mind ? how about this ? a bus comes , there are four peopleare standing , a bus comes picks one person and goes away and same bus comes picks thesecond person and then goes away third person goes away , fourth person goes away that s it .each time number of people should reduced , should reduced yeah reduce by one ok ? trydoing that and a good challenge would be make a ball bounce in that rectangle region whereyou animated , you create a ball which is an object and that ball should bounce around andstuff like that so you see there are actually many games written just using scratch , verybeautiful games in fact they are addictive you can probably create snakes game , heard ofsnakes game yeah ! use your arrow keys and the snake moves the things like that a littlecomplicated but it is not so difficult , you probably should try doing it , there are a whole lot oflive examples on scratch website itself where in you will be getting code on how exactly agame works and you can see through the code and understand how you can create a variant ofthem .we have now come to the flag end of our first chapter it s time for us to summariseeverything that we learnt so far , we first saw how to make our cat move , how to make herrotate , what was the introduction to programming ? and then i told you how to group a bunchof tasks ? and there lies the heart of programming , right ? we spoke about loops and variablesand i told you how you can make the cat recite tables , then we went ahead and showed you acouple of fun examples using our newly learnt programming skills it is now time to see a fewmore topics in scratch which we will take up in the forth coming chapter .hey you can see there are so many featured projects available in scratch , you can alwaysexplore them , but before we get into the details of how to design our own scratch game thereare many important concepts available in scratch so let us have a look at them .let us start with arithmetic operators . what are those ? pretty straight forward pull this , thisside ok i have put this here now i will enter let say five here and six here and when i doubleclick on this you see i get eleven , double click eleven . double click eleven right ? if youchange this let s say to fifteen and then double click , you will get five plus fifteen which istwenty ok and whatever is the result if you would want you can you can now put let s say tenand eight here , double click you will get two . ok now look at this , there is something morethat you can do , let me delete ten here and let me put this here you see what happened ? irepeat i can put this here do you see what s happening here , i can put this here so five plusfifteen is twenty , twenty minus eight is , what is it ? whatever is the answer , you will see thathere , it s twelve correct ? and i can go on doing this in fact i can take a subtraction thing andthen i can divide the answer by two and i can pull this entire thing here like this , so you takethis and place it here so it is five plus fifteen is twenty minus eight is twelve by two is sixdouble click and you will see six ok ? you can ease this , you can use these arithmeticoperators the way you want and also there is an interesting function here , see what this does ?isn t that self explanatory ? i don t have to explain this to you correct ? it fix a random numberfrom one to ten double click ten , double click six again four , double click one double clicksix , double click four , double click one see it is very random it doesn t follow any pattern okdon t worry so much about how exactly this is done ? that s a very complicated subject alltogether but you please be aware of this very beautiful facility of scratch , which gives you anumber between one to ten picked randomly . so it is not just limited to one to ten as youwould have guessed you make this hundred it will pick a number from one to hundred , i justmade this hundred right now double click you will get a random number twenty two betweenone to hundred twenty two , twenty three , fifty five , twenty three , fifty eight , seven , ninetyseven , eighty five , eighty four you see there is no particular pattern , you can start from anynumber up to any number ask for a random number you will see we will using this a wholelot in our explanation throughout our course we will be using this , right ? so scratch is thatway very interesting and very straight forward and self explanatory that you just see it youcould guess what this function is ok , so let me do something very interesting then let me keepthis aside may be even delete this , let me do something interesting . let me consider , i have topick a random number from one to hundred and put that here you see what i am doing andthen pick another random number from one to hundred and put that here , and what is a result ?double click on it one ninety so you pick a random number you pick a another randomnumber , you are adding it double click one forty four so some of two random numbers pickbetween one to hundred is giving you some random number here and some random numberhere , is giving you so much ok ninety five , one sixty one , one thirty nine , hundred and so onin fact what you can do is you can make our cute cat recite these numbers , let s see how shecan do it ? go to looks , go to say hello keep it here double click on it she will say hello , youtake whatever you want , you want her to call out my name ? hi sudarshan ! double click , shesay hi sudarshan ! what you can also do is delete this , can you guess what i am going to donext pick this and put this here what will she say now , she will tell you a random number theanswer basically she less spit out one one two , twenty four , one forty four , seventy three andso on , one not four ok i can play around this and make this ok remove this what was thisdoing here ? you see the pieces here i pick a random number from one to hundred this was notrequired ten in ten not required , you can put whatever you want here , put whatever you wanthere and make the cat say , i will just make her say ten plus twenty , what is that ? you all knowits thirty but let me see whether see says thirty or not , double click here and she says thirtyhey ! that s right , so it so much fun to keep doing this you know the you can just try whateveryou want , go to the operators and do whatever kind of operations you want and then make hersay whatever you type right ? isn t that awesome ? right so now it s left for you to explorethese things and now move onto the next topic .we will now make our cat ask your age and say something about you , what is that ? whatexactly does she ask for and what will she do based on your age ? you should wait and see , okso now , let me teach you something go to operators and you see this join , this is nothing buttwo strings that you type here will be joined as the one string , you see you type let s say myname here and a space and you type nptel it will show sudarshan nptel ok , whatever youwant you can put ok ? new space and then delhi here it will show you newdelhi ok ? you putfirst space second it will show you first and second ok so of what use is this ? let me makethe cat do something and then make it clear to you what could be an application of joiningthese two strings , let me now go to looks and take say and then let me create a variable calledname . ok done so name will contain nothing to begin with as you know it always starts withzero set name to let say your name , my name i will put sudarshan space so name will be putas sudarshan and cat will say call out my name right now , you see what s happening , it willsay sudarshan but i want her to say hello sudarshan , how do i do that ? pretty simple . removethis , say hello here space and then put a name here it will say hello and whatever is the namesaid to sudarshan perfect ! now click on this , she will say hello sudarshan is that clear ?perfect . so she now saying hello sudarshan and then i want her to take my age let s say icreate a variable called age and i will set age to whatever is my age ok , age is now thirty fiveand i want her to tell me whether i am an adult or not ? off course i know i am adult , i ameighteen plus but i want the cat to decide whether that i am eighteen plus or not ? how do i dothat ? there is something called if look , an if look which does the following , so if the age isgreater than or equal to eighteen how do i do that ? go to operators am being little fast herebecause i have a felling you are now , you people are now familiarising yourself with thescratch programming and you are way too comfortable with whatever i am doing right ? if notyou may want to pause and then try it out yourself slowly and then see what is happeninghere ok ? ok. if the age is greater than seventeen , if age is greater than seventeen means whatthe age is greater than or equal to eighteen , seventeen is not allowed if the age is greater thanseventeen then the cat will say , it says hey you are an adult , you can do anything you want ,although this is not true you can not do anything you want by anything you want i meananything that is allowed for you to do right ? but if the age is less than something it must sayoh oh ! you are not an adult . how do i do that ? go to control , go to if , go to data take yourage , go to operators use this less than if age is less than eighteen which means seventeensixteen fifteen and so on the cat must say , how do i make her say , cat must say oh oh ! you arestill a kid ! the world is not so open for you ok , now what happens if i execute this let s see , iwill click on it first ok , i should put a pause here you see that s very important , control and imake cat wait for let say three seconds and i am going to set my name to sudarshan the catwill say hello sudarshan , it will wait for three seconds and age i am going to enter herebased on what is my age it will say so and so ok let s see , double click hello sudarshan waitfor three seconds hey you are an adult you can do anything you want but if my age where tolike say fifteen , i am far from fifteen but assuming that i am fifteen i double click on it , it willnow come here , off course say hello sudarshan wait for three seconds my age is fifteen now itwill come here , it will see that the my age is greater than seventeen no ! which means this willnot get executed my age is less than eighteen yes ! fifteen is less than eighteen so this will getexecuted let s see . double click on this hello sudarshan wait for three seconds and then thiswill happen , ok if you are finding this a little confusing what i will do is i will separate thisfrom this forget this for the time being will not worry about this we will only look at thiscode , if age is fifteen double click it says oh oh ! you are still a kid , if age is ten what will bethe answer ? age is less than eighteen off course this should get executed let s see , doubleclick yes ! the same thing , if my age was twenty five then i am an adult it should say you arean adult double click yeah ! you are an adult , you can do anything you want , now do youunderstand the importance of this loop ? it just checks for a condition and does what you askthe cat to do here ok , now , let me add a small animation to it just for clarity , one second , heyyou are an adult and move a few steps forward ok , it must move some twenty steps forward ifone is an adult so set age is twenty five which means this must get executed , it must movetwenty steps ahead see it says and it moves ok , let me give it a pause so that it is visible toyou people . wait for a second and then move , see it moves it says hey ! you are an adult andmoves by twenty steps again double click says hey you are an adult and moves twenty stepsbut if i am ten year old double click it says oh oh you are still a kid world is not so open foryou it doesn t move ahead right ? because in my if loop here this gets executed and only thisis displayed . correct ? now if i were to take this and put this here let s say wait for a secondand then move twenty steps backwards so if you are not an adult which is by the way the casehere given that your age is ten she will move back a little ok , let me say minus thirty , sheobviously ! minus forty also so that she goes back twice the distance double click she goesback correct ? again double click she goes back correct ? she says this and then goes backcorrect ? but if it was some , if i was sixty here old she will call me an adult and go forward , ifi was five year old , she will say i am not an adult and still a kid and she will go back . ibelieve you are seeing her move back here , five here let s say forty she will move aheadcorrect ? perfect ! may be , you may want to write this code and then check if it s reallyworking the way it working with me right and you may want to explore how if works withthe different example and a small exercise for you all , what do you think the if then else loopdoes ? this is called a loop ok ? i told you how if then works , if then is what is given here youmust tell me how if then else works ? go on . before anything let me attach this here and tryexecuting this programme for one last time with my age double click says hello sudarshanand my age is given to be this and it moves forward and says you are an adult and you can doanything you want perfect ! so let me move on to the next lesson .so it was a whole lot of fun learning scratch , i must tell you people that not everyone has thisbend for programming in the beginning , it takes some time to seize in your minds and scratchdoes that to your mind . you will have a clear understanding of how a loop works , we sawhow a list works , what is a variable , what is a block ? you see , block is something thatrepeatedly does a kind of instruction that you give and you can use that any where you want ,it is actually called a functioning programming . will see those details very soon , may be youare wondering , is programming so much fun ? in fact it is indeed so much fun but scratchmakes it a whole lot of fun so now let s switch our guess and look at python as aprogramming language trust me if you are very good at scratch you will not face anydifficulty learning python . so you mean to say that there are lot of similarities in python andscratch , i would say that they are exactly the same although you will not have this facility ofdrag and then using repeat loop and things like that , scratch is made for eight year old , pythonis lot more powerful and hence given that it lot more powerful the way you write a piece ofcode in python is very different and can be just a little more challenging than how you do it inscratch .in the last week you got to know what is programming all about , we all saw thatprogramming can indeed be fun . we showed several nice examples on scratch asked you tocreate your own scratch programmes , i am sure many of you tried doing it . let us now switchmodes and start learning python . python isn t as easy as scratch but we assure you that wewill certainly make is easy and interesting to you . so get your cup of tea pen paper andcomputers ready let s start .hi everyone on this video we will see how to download anaconda . anaconda is a tool towhich you can write your programmes in python and even combine it literally , so why we aresuggesting anaconda ? because , anaconda comes with a lot of libraries so you don t have toinstall those libraries again or those packages again so it is very user friendly for beginners soin this course throughout we will be using anaconda only and with anaconda there comes anide know as spyder so we will be using spyder , so let s see this .so let me just type on google anaconda ok , type anaconda python , so it is comes under thesnake to and python ok , so you can see the link , this is the link which is anaconda , you canclick here so i will just type url ok , huh you can sign up here also that you get news letter andnew versions if there release anything you will get a notification also that so just go to thedownload anaconda and click on it , ok you can see you can download it on windows , you candownload it on mac and even linux so today i am going to install the anaconda on windowsten so you can easily download it by following the same instructions which i am going toprovide you though this video , you can download it on linux also and mac also so let me goto the windows version ok , just click on it ok you can see the anaconda . is there forwindows installer , there are two types of version python . version and python . version .in this course we will be using python or .x i mean point any of the released version , sowe will like you to install the python . version rather than python . versions even thoughthe difference is very less some syntax literally syntax differences are in . and . versionbut there are some libraries which are compatible in . version and not compatible in .version so in this course we would like you to download the . version just click on thisdownload button , i already downloaded this in my computer so i will just check my , i will goto the download ok , so you can see anaconda . is already there so i will just double clickon it ok so just make it i agree it s up to you what you want , just me or all the users i amdoing for just me ok you can check where you want to install the anaconda , you can make itas a default also as default it goes to the c drive so it s up to you so i will use the defaultversion , i will go there just install it , it will take some time .ok guys you can see that the installation is completed so i just press next , i don t wantmicrosoft visual code so i will skip this you can check this read manual how to learn , how toget started with anaconda ? so let s see this what they provide . so getting started withanaconda can go through all these things ok ? you can check how to start anaconda i meanspyder id on windows and linux and mac other operative system and you can learn moreabout anaconda cloud , so this is done so i will search here go to the search pad and typespyder so just click it . so you can see the spyder this , i opened this spyder ide , this part isthe part where i write the programme and you can see this name , this name is the name of myprogramme so i can change this for example what i will do , start save as let say and i save itas my first.py ok , ok ? this part is the part where you can see the console so you can see hereit s written i python console so in this console you can mostly you will get all the outputsrelated things , this part is the part where you can see the variables and how they are , how andthe files another we will discuss . variable means how they are changing and how ? whatvalues they are taking it so we will learn about this in other videos and you should know thatin the python console you can it works as the interpreter console so you can do some kind ofprogramming also example if i write here two plus three it will give me five because itinterprets here it s not like other languages like c , c and java where you have to compileit first then you have to run it , it works as interpreter and line well and interprets , in consoleyou can write those things ok , let me just write a simple command of print here ok and let meshow how to run this so i just write print ok and in the columns my first programme ok andyou save it , here you can see the run button just click on it yes run it , my first programme . sothis is how you do your programming , let me do something some other stuff , this erase it andlet me just create a simple variable ok , a is equal to ten which means a is a just visualiseit as a bucket containing lets say ten cookies or a class which contain or a jar which containten cookies ok ? let me create another bucket or a jar containing thirteen cookies let s say ok ,now i want to create a jar in c i want to add these add a number of cookies of whichrepresenting a and which representing b in the c so i want c as the c should contain all thecookies which representing a plus all the cookies representing b so i will just write a andcookies in bok i will save this now i want to print cookies in c let s see , cookies in c itshould come twenty three the best thing about thing is you can revise the thing what are thevariables you are created , you can see those variables , what represents in the console alsowrite here a only and see a it will show ten , and b show thirteen and c show twenty three andhere you can see all the variables that helped in created a of type integer will see about inother videos , a is of integer type and value it has is ten , b is also integer and maybe is thirteenand c is also integer and value is thirty three so these are the basics stuffs you can print , soyou can print here also hi , my name is amit verma ok so print , print it print directly here sothis videos was about just installation of anaconda on windows so just follow the same stepon mac if you are using mac operation system or if you are using linux operating systemthen the instructions are same just go to the anaconda cloud download the latest version ,make sure you know the architecture for example i take i downloaded the anaconda python. with bit so you should know the architecture of your operating system , if it is bityou can download and bit both but if it is a bit you have to download the bitversion only so make sure you know the architecture and this is pretty much so i just wantedyou guys to see how to download the anaconda , we all in all the videos we will be using thespyder ide only , it is very easy you can import , it has a lot of libraries present so you don thave to download some libraries by yourself , if you just download python open source librarywhich comes in the python you have to download it again , so independently you need todownload those packages so with anaconda you do not have to do that because it comes withso all those library , most of the library some of the libraries you might have to download andif you have to download those libraries we will tell you , how to download it , so this was itplease if you find any problem regarding installation of this anaconda please post it on forumwe will help you we will also provide a documentation how to download it on mac , widowsand linux so yeah thank you .i have now opened a spyder terminal without before going further let us look at some basicfunctionalities of this interface off course we told you a whole lot about anaconda installationjust now i will just tell you one fact that will be helpful for me to teach you more of python ,this is called a console where i can check some commands and this is the place where i typemy python code , you will soon get familiarized with these things don t worry if you don tunderstand completely , what i will do is in the interest of making the video visible to you all iwill maximise this you can also do it by going to view and then saying maximise currentpane , current pane means the pin where you all write now , you click on it , it becomes fulllike this and if you want to get back to its normal state you can go to view and say restorecurrent pane ok , for the time being i will maximise this , maximised it increasing the font andthen let s start . we saw what are variables i can say a equals ten , b equals twenty and thensay c equals a plus b and then i can print what is in c , its thirty correct c was a plus band see now when you print what is in c this command print says what is in c display it , ifi say show c , it will not show anything it will show you some weird stuff like this becausepython only recognises the word print it doesn t recognise the word show , i can not simplysay what is in c ? it will not know what we are talking right ? there is a particular way ofsaying something print c is the way of saying , ok it shows thirty now i can simply say calso it will say thirty but it s a good practice to say print of c always , you will know whyvery soon . now if i say x is equal to within quotes sudarshan and i say print x just theway i said print c , i say print x it will show what ever in x , so you must be wonderingwhy should i say print x , i can directly type sudarshan here , if your point is to displaysudarshan , simply type sudarshan here now note this whenever we are trying to teach yousomething we will use a very silly example that is in the interest of teaching it is in no wayindication of the importance of a command so print x displays sudarshan am just trying toillustrate what print does . i am not telling you the exact usage of the print command , exactusage will come next .you just now saw what print does , it isn t just this let us see more of it now . now i have threet a s in my course now my first t a let me call it t one is amit , t one equal amit , when i say tit will show amit as you can see ok , and my second t a s name is simran and my third t a sname is vidya . now i have t t and t now see what i am going to do , no i am going to sayprint hello t inside quotes i am going to put t and then i am going to close and guess whatwill happen , it will say hello t why ? whatever you put within in the quotes it will simplyshow whatever is inside that s it but if i say print hello and then close the quotes and then puta comma and then say t close the bracket and then say enter you see what happen , youprobably can guess what is happening here i need not explain , it saying hello followed bywhatever was told in t , what was told in t ? amit was told in t . so it is simply saying helloamit , if i were to say print hello t , it will say hello simran , where to say print hello don tworry about what comes here it is a help look up on how print command works , so pleaseignore this , this is too much for you to understand or even see what is written here so justignore this thing that is coming in here , so let we say hello comma t it will say hellovidhya ok , there are my t a s , i am the instructor if i say i equals sudarshan and now if i sayprint i it will simply print sudarshan , if i say print hello i it will say hello sudarshan ok ? if isay print , see i can use up arrow to go to the precious command , i just said up arrow , uparrow there are four arrows you see up , down , left , right ? if i press up it will goes to theprecious command , previous command . if i again press up arrow it goes to this previouscommand it is print of i see and then the previous and then the previous i will be using thisquite often don t get confused don t be worried how i am able to type something very quicklyi am just using this is called the history look up , i am just going and seeing the history sowhat if i say print hello t , t , t what will it display ? let us see what it will display . so itsays hello amit , simran vidhya because t t t are amit , simran and vidhya . now let s dosomething print hello t , t , t and then comma how are you all doing , how are you all doingtoday ? then i close again it is self explanatory isn t it ? you now know what this does , itsimply says hello amit simran vidhya how are you all doing today ? see programming is allabout this , if i now realise that t is amit but amit said sir please display my full name myfull name is amit verma then i will say t is equal to amit underscore verma let s say i put itlike this ok ? now when i say print t , it says amit verma now you can wonder what happenedto the precious t which was actually amit , it is over written by that i mean whatever youassign the latest t is amit verma will be the latest value ok ? if now i say t is equal to let sayindia , t print t will give you india , amit verma is now gone . correct ? ok. so let me now getback amit verma up arrow up arrow up arrow up arrow t is equal to amit verma and what iwill do is i will display this once again , up arrow up arrow up arrow huh ! hello t t t howare you all doing ? its look at the output here it was hello amit simran vidhya how are you alldoing ? now t has become amit verma this t is now amit verma , so it will say hello amitverma simran and vidhya , simran vidhya how are you all doing today ? see hello amit vermasimran vidhya how are you all doing today ? correct , now let me enhance slightly , i wouldwant to put a and here after t t i want to put and right ? when you have three namesafter two names you have to put and , and then after hello amit verma simran vidhya , i want toput a full stop , so i will put a full stop here before how starts correct ? this , look at thiscommand properly , look at this entire command properly let me highlight it for you , look atthis entire command , what am i trying to do here , i am simply saying hello t t and t fullstop how are you all doing today ? perfect it says hello amit verma simran and vidhya howare you all doing today ? amazing now you understand how print command works and howyou can club variables with print command , let us conclude this discussion with a very smallexercise . i say age is equal to thirty enter ok ? print the number you entered was put age andclose it will say the number you entered was thirty , now if you change age to some forty andthen print it will say entered was forty correct ? now i will say age whatever it was , whatwas it ? print age will tell you what age was , age was forty . why not thirty ? because youwrote it once again , once you write age equals forty the latest assignment for age will betaken , by assignment is what i mean forty gets stored in this variable called age ok. if i sayage equals age plus one this is a little worry some what does one mean by age equal age plusone , python is a particular way of functioning ? when someone says age equals age plus onepython simply takes the age value and add one to it and assigns the new value to this namelyage print age will show you forty one . correct ? don t worry so much about what thesevariables are ? you will become very clear with them with time ok ? variable is more like ahouse where you store some entity right ? you store you keep book in a cub board right ? avariable is like a cub board and your book is like a value that you assigning see it that way itwill become handy to you to call age and the value of age whatever it is right now forty onewill be ready for your reference right ? so don t worry even if you didn t understand if youunderstood only fifty percent of what i taught still you are through with understanding goodamount of python in the forth coming lectures .so we saw what is print command and let us do something , let us use it properly . when i saya equals one and then print a , you get one . when i say a equals a plus one it means you areincrementing a by one so what will happen to a ? it will become two . i again say a equals aplus one and then i say a becomes three , a equals a plus one and then a equals to fourand so on correct ? you now follow what is print command very well ok , so now i canactually say a equals a plus one and then put a colon and then say print of a these twocommands gets executed simultaneously firstly it will as good as executing the command andthen executing this command so if i type the same thing and plus enter it will display six ,seven , eight , nine , ten , eleven , twelve and so on ok , let me clear the screen by typing clear onnow a equals one once again print a which will make it print one , now look at this a equals aplus one print a again , i put a colon ok , another this is semi colon not colon sorry and then isay a equals a plus one once again and i put a semi colon and say print a once again ,again a semi colon a equals a plus one then i say print a what is this do ? it will simplyexecutes all these commands in a sequence enter , two three four why because a was alreadyone i incremented it by one it became two and then it printed a and so on ok ? so what ishould do is i should probably print a , a equals one assign that and then print a and then put asemi colon and then increment a and so on now this is a sequence of instructions do youunderstand that , a equals one is the first thing assign a to one in plain english this whathappening , assign a assign one to a not a to one i am sorry don t assign a to one assign ,you assign one to a and then you print what is in a and then again you make a become onemore that s what this means , sir why does we write it as a equal a plus one that s theconvention , you must learn it that way , this is how you can talk to python ok ? a equals aplus one incremented , print a now , now a will be displayed as two , a equals a plus onenow a becomes three now , a will be printed as three , a equals a plus one , a becomesfour then a will be printed as four , perfect let s execute this and see this is what it happens , itdisplays hip hip hurray ! we are done . it says one , two , three , and four you have learnt one ofthe important aspects of python , important aspects of programming in general , andprogramming is all about executing a sequence of instructions to the computer . telling thecomputer what to do right ? ok. perfect . so now you understand how to use print command ,what are variables , and how you can type something in a sequence ?it is now time to learn a new command , please note that print command just we showed youright now it is used to display something meaning output something to the screen yourmonitor right ? now let us learn how to take something as input from your keyboard bywriting a piece of code .i have now opened a spyder terminal as you can see here is my what is called the consolewhere you can type your code , here is my place where i can type my code , what do i mean bythat . let me remove whatever is present here , once you become a sufficient programmer youcan , you will understand what was present and what i am deleting makes about documentingyour code anyway let s not worry about it . now look at i can now say a equals one , a equals aplus one and then after a equals one i say print a and then after a equals a plus one i will sayprint a ok now i want this to be executed all at once . this is equivalent to remember we justconsole we were trying to type something in the previous discussion a equals one print a , thisis same as a equals one put a semi colon and then say print a correct ? a equals one print a andthen a equals a plus one and then print a will simply execute all these things at once this canbe given here or the same thing will also be given here , when you give here you must executethis code by going to the menu click on run and then click on run , it will first ask me to savethis file , it is just like saving your simple ms word file i will type print dot py , it shouldalways have py extension here like how you are ms word files have doc extension and notepads file have docs txt extension , your python has dot py extension click on save whereveryou want to save and now when you go to run and say run it will run you and see the answerone and two is the answer it says running this particular file ok , let me write more , a equals aplus one and then print a ok , we will copy paste this and then repeat this again and again ,perfect one this is so much fun i want to see what exactly happens now from here i plannedto execute it , so how many times we should print a ? once twice three four five times sixtimes seven times eight times and nine times let s make it ten times now , now what do youexpect to be the output ? it should have one two three four five six seven eight nine ten .correct ? let s see if this is what does , go to run and click on run , you will get se perfect onetwo three four five six seven eight nine ten what did you learn just now ? you can write asequence of using semi colon here i will show you wait , where was that ? here . like this youcan type or you can type it like this or even you can save it for future reference right ? you cansave this file here is your programme what does a programme do ? assign one to the variablea and print variable a , as i told you variable is more like an entity which stores a value , a nowhas one but the same a is now incremented by one and then you print a and then youincrement a by one print a and so on , so where minimum pre requisites is expected in thiscourse and many of you do not know anything about programming , so all of you who isseeing programming for the first time will find this lessons very self explanatory and peoplewho knows some programming already might be getting bored because we are talking aboutbasics but very soon you will see that we will pace up and cover the whole of python and getinto some really cool computing applications so please tolerate our simplicity for the next fewlecture videos .all right so i am gon na teach you people how to take input from the computer , what do wemean by this ? i will illustrate with an example . firstly let us make a full screen then look atthis print what is your name ? ok , it shows what is your name ? and then i say n equals inputwhat is your name ? same thing i am going to put here . this will also say what is your name ?but it will wait for you to type for your name . see what happens i say enter see it is sayingwhat is your name and you see the cursor blinking here , do you see the cursor blinking hereright ? i will type sudarshan , now it stops . you know what it has done right now , it has takensudarshan and as assigned sudarshan to n how do you know that ? say print n and there youare sudarshan ok if i say n equals input what your name is ? and i type iit underscore roparand i say print n , it prints iit ropar ok ? let me put this to use now i hope , you all understoodwhat we are doing here , correct ? so , let me go to view and then restore current pane and ihave this ok , so let me now write a code for this . print , i need not print i directly say n equalsinput what is your name ? and whatever you input i will then say print hello n can you stare atthese two lines and tell me what this does ? ok let us run and see that is the best part aboutprogramming . if it is hard for you to guess what something will do you can run and see whatit does ? so if i we may guess it will ask you to type your name and assign that name to n andit will say hello n depending on whatever name you are going to type run and its asking mefor your name , what is your name ? i will type let s say india , my name is india . tats it , it sayshello india . correct ok , let s add some more spice to it i will say print hello n how are you nprint i hope life is treating n well so what happens , let us save this first run this and see whathappens . it says again what is your name ? i will type my original name sudarshan , whatshould it now say hello sudarshan how are you sudarshan i hope , life is treating sudarshanwell i am very bad at punctuation so let me correct those things right now . dot here and howare you sudarshan after that i need to put a question mark hello n and then exclamation maybe correct ? what is your name as a question mark ? right ? now let me save this and run this .what is your name ? i say sudarshan . and it says hello sudarshan exclamation how are yousudarshan question mark i hope life is treating sudarshan well you see what we did , if insteadof sudarshan i were to input something else wish let me try now . let me go to run and thensay run its asking me for name i will take some other name ok , i will type ram , what is yourname ? ram . how are you ram ? i hope life is treating ram well , now isn t that interesting youtype something and that is put as a place holder in many places and there is a customisedmessage for that person . ok ? watch this video couple of times to get a hang off what we aretrying to say this is going to be important , we are going to take whole lot of input from usersand should understand how that is done .imagine i walk into a restaurant or let say shop where there is a discount of ten percent whichmeans if you buy something for hundred rupees you actually got to pay only ninety rupees , ifyou buy something for hundred and fifty rupees you going to pay only one thirty five rupeesso you will get a discount of ten percent . which means whatever is the price you shouldmultiply by point nine ? so now let us write a programme which takes as input the cost andthen tells you the price after discount basically it must simply multiply by point nine and thengive you the answer . ok now how do i go about this let me teach you something . print , whatis the cost ? alright ? what is the cost ? and you enter something what should that be cost c iscost c equals input i will say what is the cost ? this is how it is done right ? end a bracket likethis and it will wait for you to enter . when i press one fifty it will takes c as one fifty see printc i am sorry , print within bracket c correct ? now i will say print , let s say answer is equal to ctimes point nine . it is throwing some error you see you must understand this . whenever weask for c the c you wrote one fifty but the computer seized it as , it doesn t see it as a numberit sees it as what it called string . now assume your is like your vehicle can only take diesel itcan not take petrol , if you fill petrol you are doing a huge mistake , you probably making yourvehicle unusable correct ? so this is now trigged as string on string you can not do any kind ofmathematical operations , there is a way to handle this . what you must do , you must convertthe string to a number , if this done by the following way . we say d equals hint of c now printd , this will be a number now this you can do answer equals d times point zero point nine andnow if you print answer it will have one three five , if you find it difficult what i said let mestart from the beginning ok ? so let me clear the screen . i say c equals input right input enterthe cost of the item and then you will enter something let say two hundred ok now print c istwo hundred you can not do any addition or subtraction on the c now that s how it is , youmight be wondering why ? now all these programming languages comes with its own way ofhandling , you probably you are wondering how difficulties it to ensure that we the peoplewho made python gave us this facility of manipulating c directly why should we do this ? butthis is the standard . what should we do ? we should say d equals convert this to integer that sthe command for it int of c a note if you say d equals integer of c it will show weird error likethis , name integer is not defined , if you can guess it is just saying that i don t know , what doyou mean by integer ? when i say d equals int it knows . it converts the value in c on to aninteger like value , so d is now assigned the value two hundred , this two hundred is in d andsince it s an integer it is ready to take your arithmetic operations so you can do math on it . sowhat is my math ? answer will be zero point nine times please note you should put a star herethat s the multiplication symbol not your typical x you do in school days ok , if you do that itwill show an error , you put an star here , star is on your key board it s just on top of thenumber eight . point nine times d that the answer now i will print answer it will give you oneeighty is the discounted price after removing ten percent from what you input . now what isour job ? our job right now would be to write a code for this for an entire thing how do we goabout ? print hi how are you doing ? hi how are you , let us compute the final price afterdiscount we say enter right ? what is that ? c equals input enter the cost of the item and thenyou should do d equals int of c then you should finally say answer is equal to zero point ninetimes d and finally you must say print the cost after discount is close the colon comma sayanswer and there you are , this will do everything that will wanted to do . first it will print hihow are you etc and then it will say enter the cost , you will enter whatever you enter goes to cand then d will be a convert of c , you are converting the petrol car to the diesel car it ssomething like that ok so that you can you can write the way you want . ahh see there is adifference between a diesel engine and a petrol engine you can not treat one like the othercorrect ? so d equals integer of c , so now d becomes a integer variable you can do all sorts ofmathematical operations on it i told you this how python works so you should not ask lotquestions there ha ha ! right ? so answer is equal to zero point nine times d if you don tunderstand this is how you compute discount right ? ninety percent of the original value iswhat you get by ten percent discount if you need a pen and paper to work this out but trust memy math is decent enough that i can tell you that this is the formula . answer equals pointnine times d so then finally i print the cost after discount is the answer let us see whathappens to this code , go to run and then run this , this is short cut as well f to run it , i amdoing it the age old way don t call me a bad programmer there are lot of nice ways in whichyou can run this code but i don t like using a portal like this i like doing it on the commandprompt but to make you understand i am using it the old school way so run . hi how areyou ? let us complete the final price of the discount enter the cost i bought something forthousand rupees , one thousand rupees so what will be my discount ? ten percent gone shouldbe nine hundred let s see and i press enter whoo ! here you are nine hundred . do you see thesped with the chit computed nine hundred now that is computers that is programming . youwrite in such a long way what it should do and it executes in like boom ! a fraction of asecond and that is what makes programming interest . so what did you just now learn ? youlearn how to write a piece of code to compute the final discount price right ? sky is the limitgo ahead see this video again and try to write a code which takes a value and then tells youwhat will happen if you were to sell this item with fifteen percent profit which means if youtake something for hundred rupees and you sell it for hundred and fifteen rupees go aheadwrite the code and see if it works fine or not ?let us now see how to instruct your computer to understand your if conditions usingpython . i keep repeating the same thing again and again please don t feel bugged this is veryimportant , it takes time for you to understand everything right ? you might be wondering whyis he talking so much about if , why should i worry about traffic signals and how will that beuseful in computers . you will soon see as the weeks pass by how will be using this ifcondition the way we keep saying hi to your friends every now and then you see them , youwill keep using this if condition to your computer whenever you are programming you wouldbe that frequent is noted .so now you know how to take user input in python now let us try to perform some operationson the input and see what happens ?ok so now let s start , let me now type print statement print hi how are you ? just like that i amtyping this ok , then i am going to take my choice to be equal to input please enter your choiceok , what will happen ? let me run and see . so as i told you , you can go to run and then runand you can always run by this short cut key mentioned here which is f on my machine , itcan be different on your machine too depending upon what you are using an apple computerit will be different , if you are using a windows machine it will be different and if you areusing a linux machine it will be different . if you don t understand don t worry all that youshould do is you should see what key board , what key is given here and you should press thatthat s one way of executing , clicking on run is another way there is yet another way which isthis button here right ? ok. so now let me press this button here . it asks this let say run and itsays ho how are you here you see that , let me zoom , hi how are you here and it says pleaseenter your choice . i will write ten so the choice is taken as ten but i don t get to know whatmy choice is so what i should do for that is say print c that s it again run this it will say , hihow are you please enter your choice i will say ten it will print ten . correct ? now i will say ifmy , see you know what ? your c will always be a string here ok ? what do i mean by that ? letme delete this and spend some time here and tell you what i am trying to say . when i sayprint c here it will show ten . let me do one thing , if i say , c plus it throws a error , i told youbecause c will be c in as a string it is not seen as an number ok , i will show you somethingmore funny when i say c into five ok ? it will then tell you its true colour you know c into fivewill means if c is ten c into five is ten ten ten ten now ha ha ha how funny is that ? so c intofive according to me is fifty when c is ten . as i told you i am going to repeat this more oftenthan what you can consider as acceptable computers are very dumb they will not understand ,i repeat computers are very dumb you must precisely tell them what you want the computerto do ? if you simply say c into ten it will print ten ten ten ten times because c is a stringaccording to the computer it sees as a string for that you convert it to the integer by integer imean a number you must give this command , d is equal to int of c what is this mean ? itmeans c was a string when i entered like this using this command but i am converting thatinto integer and the resultant int is an integer by integer you mean a number . the resultingnumber will be stored in d when i say this now see the magic . when i say d into five what doyou expect ? see it says fifty very good ! it s a nice computer . i mean it listens to what i saybut it is bad enough that it is not smart enough that it can figure out what i am trying to say . ifi say c into ten it will put ten ten ten ten ten times , only when i convert that to a number willit give me the right answer right , initially you see it threw of an error when i said c plus twothat s because c was a string . if i say d plus two it will say twelve . correct ? perfect .so what i will do here is i will go here please enter your choice c is entered i will print c and iwill say d equals int of c , which means now d will be , let me remove this , this is not requiredwhy should i print c. directly say d equals int o f c now look at what i am going to do next ifd is equal to one colon enter print , you entered one that s it . and now i will run this youprobably have no clue what i wrote here this is doesn t sound like english , this doesn t soundlike mathematics it doesn t sound like any language and you are very bugged i know it butstay patience let s see what this does . run hi how are you please enter your choice i say oneand it says you entered one ok let me figure out what this is doing ? i will repeat this onceagain run enter your choice i will press two and choose nothing . remember what we did withour scratch programme , yes ! you do remember right ? look at this we used set c equalssomething and then we said if c equals something then do something c equals two c equalsthree then something . similarly , similarly i am trying to do it by using python right now .python is not as beautiful as scratch where we can simply drag and drop stuff here you needto do some work . what is that work ? you should type things that you want , what do youmean by that ? look at this . i say if d is equal to two then print you enter the number two ,whatever you put here it will put , if i if i replace this by my name it will display my namenow let me run this . please enter your choice i say one it says you entered one let me run thisonce again . i say my choice enter your choice i say two it will say you entered the numbertwo correct ? let me do more of this . if d is equal to three then say , what should i say ? printyou entered the number three no that s very boring i will say i am tired , i am tired just likethat for fun i am saying something else here so let me run this . but my choice is used to beone it says you entered one , if my choice happens to be two it says you entered the numbertwo and if your choice happens to be three it will say you entered three ! no that s becausethat s not what i am saying here as i told you the computers that you are that that you areusing is so dumb it will just do same time very faithfully so it will just do what you are askingit to do not more not less so it will actually say ahhh i am tired so now it s very clear to youhow if loop works in python how word of warning , you should type if within brackets onlyyou should type let s say d is equal to one please note it is not one equal in python it is twoequals . you can ask me in scratch you put one equal here why are you sir putting two equalshere ? my friend english is different from , hindi is different from , german is different from ,sanskrit is different from , tamil , telugu , kannada , you name it all this languages aredifferent , they come with their own style and you must stick to that style otherwise thecomputer will slap you what do i mean by that ? i will tell you what i mean by that . instead ofprint if i say print you see and you run here it will say please enter your choice i will say oneand you see name prnt is not defined it got confused basically , it will show u a lot ofunwanted stuff these scary stuff , you start wondering you will probably close your laptop andrun away . all these entries you know , don t worry about them it quite advanced , computergets confused how to react so it will throw up all these unwanted text so we should be verycareful what to say and what not to say . let me write it back to print and then click , it sayingplease enter your choice i enter one it does show you , you entered one .ok , so coming back two equalities are important and after this there should be a colon , ifthere is no colon it will behave weirdly look at this i have removed colon right now i amrunning it , see invalid syntax it is even showing these arrows saying that ahh the syntaxinvalid syntax . the complicated word don t worry about what this means ? it means computeris instead of angry with you for having , made a mistake . it says something is wrong here ,what is wrong here ? you should put a colon here . why ? because that s how python worksand then you come to the next line , you see you have printed , what , why have i left this spacehere ? let me not leave this space here and then let me execute . you see expected andindented block ahhh whatever that means if you dint understand don t worry you are notalone it is very difficult to make out what the computer says whenever it is angrily scoldingyou this is called compilation error and even its also complicated so don t worry all i mean isit is not very happy so that s because python expects you to give this space here and maintainthat space everywhere whenever you are inside a if loop like this what do i mean ? let s goback to the scratch and look at this if something is true then you execute this , you see you caneven put statements here go to looks and say you put hello here then it will say then youmake this one so that its comes here double click its goes to here good morning for fiveseconds , five seconds over ? yeah over . now hello for two seconds and then it will stop . yousaw what happened ? it will come inside and execute these two things whatever is within thisyellow if loop similarly in python whatever is indented it will show . what do i mean by this ?i will come here and i say print so you are doing well i see i will type this now i willexecute this ok ? now always it asks for your choice and says one it will come inside andwhat do you expect it does . it execute these two things this is like in scratch whatever isinside this yellow thing is equivalent to whatever is written after providing this space inmultiple lines after it . so when i do this and say enter you entered one so you are doing well isee , it says everything that is here it will not say anything in the next line , it will not sayanything in the next line you must note this . ok so that completes what is a if loop as endalways things are not as easy as simply watching what i do and then nodding your head ,right ? you should try writing this code all by yourself exactly what i did here , you shouldrepeat it you should also do more than that ok ? and please note these things come bypractice . in the forth coming weeks we will be using if almost every single program willhave if some where here or there you will get used to it very soon it s all a matter of time .thank you all .observe what i am going to do now , i am going to say print hi how are you ok ? and i amgoing to type this many times , hi how are you ahh i am going to just copy pasting this so letme copy this and then paste this . you all know what is copy pasting right ? ok you all havestudied ms word note pad and things like that in fact even on your on your cell phones thesedays you have copy paste facility ok so i can as many times i want so you see i have type thisten times now when i run this code its says hi how are you , hi how are you ten times ahwhat if i wants this to be displayed hundred times ? remember we discussed somethingsimilar to this on scratch right ? you recollected right ? we introduced you to what is called thelooping structures , how to repeat a task many times , how to instruct the computer to repeat atask many times ? i am gon na do that right now just observe this ten time if i were to do thishundred times i must copy paste this hundred times that s a very tds task so python has a niceway to do this . let me show you how it s done . for i in range ten what does it mean ? don tworry i will tell you print hi how is everything or maybe i should comma here i shouldprecise ok good hi , how is everything and i question mark here , my english is bad , ok so fori range ten print hi , how is everything ? what does this do ? this sounds again very weirdremember the if statement we wrote something and then we put a colon here right similarlywe write for i in range ten print hi , how is everything ? there with my speed don t worry let ssee what happens when we execute this and then i explain what exactly this is doing ok ? sowow see what happened it was so fast you people didn t probably observe it . hi how are youis how i typed it ten times but here hi how is everything ? is displayed ten times how did thishappen ? let s observe . so i is a variable by now you all know what is a variable you havedone it in scratch we have been talking about it in python so i becomes a variable in range tenmeans this in english this statement means create a variable i range ten means start assigningthe values zero , one , two , three , four , five , six , seven , eight , nine to i. i repeat for i in rangeten means assign zero to i come execute this statement , assign one to i come execute thisstatement ok assign two to i come execute this statement , three to i execute this statement andso on right ? perfect . so i varies from zero to nine and hi , how is everything ? is displayed tentimes . confusing ? don t worry as and always practice makes a person perfect let s practicemore of this forward . for let me remove this delete for i in range five print i now this willteach you how for loops works . ok , let me run this , what is happening ? zero one two threefour i variable takes the value zero one two three four , whatever you put here it s starts fromzero and comes five numbers ad one at a time is assign to i. and then that particular value of igets printed here this is zero one two three four so where to say ten here you guessed it right ,it will say zero one , two , three , four , five , six , seven , eight , nine if i say look at this print hiyou are in number let say close it comma hi what does it do ? let s see . huh ah you are innumber zero , you are in number one , you are in number two , you are in number three , you arein number four and so on right ? perfect . this makes it very clear to you what we are doing .ok , let me display the multiples of two , how do i do that ? i will delete everything let me startfrom beginning . for i in range ten colon and then you should put a tab here i should comehere and tab is because you can not start from here , you should always start from here . ok. solet me type print i will simply say i into two , you know what this does ? this will simplydisplay your two tables . let me click this then and observe what happens here . run andboom ! zero , two , four , six , eight , ten , twelve , fourteen , sixteen , eighteen but we knew twotables till twenty that s because , i in range ten means zero , one , two , three , four , five , six ,seven , eight , nine . the last number will be nine , so nine times two will be eighteen that s whyit is stopping at eighteen , if you want it to stop at twenty you should remove this and puteleven here and now look at the magic so its starts from zero and goes till twenty . correct ?ok perfect . that s about for loops observe them slowly patiently practice a few problems andyou lead through . what we will now do is we will go ahead and discuss more of for loops soit will become very familiar to you ok , it is a this point that you must understand everythingof what i have said about for loops ok so take a pause observe the video once again if youwant , write a few programmes and let us see more of for loops in the forth coming lectures .ok , let us now use for loop to do some very basic mathematics , are the reason why am doingthis basic math with for loop is to teach you how to use for loop ok ? let me ask you thisquestion . what is one plus two ? off course three . what is one plus two plus three ? it is six .one plus , two plus , three plus , four plus , five plus , six plus , seven plus , eight plus , nine plus ,ten what is it ? it is fifty five . let me use a for loop to do this ok ? to add the first fewnumbers , why are we doing this ? because we are crazy ! ha ha alright this is a usual questionpeople ask why do you make us do all these things ? we have a calculator we can add anynumbers we want right ? why are you asking us to do all these things by using somecomplicated programming . now the point is , do not add these numbers where eventuallyuseless to us right ? but to understand how python like programming language can be used toadd such numbers up to whatever level right ? it is just an exercise problem for you to learnthe intricacies of form ok ? let s go ahead and try to write a code for this . answer is equal tozero . answer is equal to answer plus one , answer is equal to answer plus two print answers .what will be the output for this ? let me check . initially answer will be zero and then answerwill become answer plus one , we have discussed this on scratch in detail this sounds like thisis the weirdest thing for a beginner programmer right ? he will start wondering what do youmean by variable equals variable plus one it doesn t make sense please note this simplymeans the existing answer what is the value for it ok i am adding one to it and i am addingtwo to it right ? answer equals zero , answer equals answer plus one so answer becomes oneand then answer equals answer plus two answer becomes initially it was one it becomes oneplus two three so i am printing answer it will be three . a good thing to do is actually printanswer in all lines if there with me is the reason teaching you people this , answer and thenfinally answer ok ? then run it say oh oh oh ! ! i should not write in quotes you see yeahotherwise it will just display answer correct we have discuss this once again so computers aredumb it will not understand what we are trying to ask them to do so initially answer is zero ,answer is zero and then print answer , answer will be zero printed fine , answer equals answerplus one so answer became one and i print the answers so it became one here answer equalsanswer plus two , answer was one and then i add two to it so it becomes three so answer isdisplayed as three correct ? now let me go ahead answer equals answer plus three printanswer now they should be like zero one three six this is same as adding one plus two plusthree you see why ? six that s what is happening here think think think think think think that sthe most important part here ok , so answer equals answer plus four print answer what willthis be now ? this will actually be lets execute and see . zero one three six and ten that sbecause one plus two plus three plus four is ten , one plus two plus three is six , one plus two isthree simply one then nothing zero right ? if i keep doing this lets say answer equals answerplus five print answer , answer equals answer plus six print answer , answer equals answer plusseven print answer i am killing time as you can see ok that s because many people wouldn tknow how to do these things right ? some of you are very familiar in programming some ofyou are taking this for the first time right ? so it s good to be slow and precise , answer plusnine print answer and finally answer equals answer plus ten and there you are when i executethis , this should be equivalent to what was that , one plus two plus three correct ? , one plustwo plus three plus four plus five plus six plus seven plus eight plus nine plus ten that wesaw already which is fifty five let s see if we get this number ok ? ready steady go ! let s runthis programme and see boom ! zero one three .... it is up to forty five , it is not showing mefifty five which should be the answer why is that ? can someone tell me because you arecalculating answer but you are not printing it so dumb of me correct ! so now let me executeit , i will get the last one to fifty five which is the sum of numbers from one two three up toten i am not happy with this i want the sum of the first hundred numbers , how do i do this ?this is where our for loop will come to our rescue let s see how this is done . look at thisanswer equals zero perfect for i in range ten answer equals answer plus i now wait verypatiently let me not go up to ten let me now only go up to three and see what happens initiallyi take zero answer is also zero answer gets added zero plus zero is zero and then i takes oneanswer is zero , zero plus one is one i takes two answer is one plus two which is three so if iexecute this it finally display the answer when i execute this i get three here perfect right ! allof you take a pause , if you are new to programming this is the place where you shouldunderstand these four lines properly , properly ok , i repeat when you execute this , answer getsincremented one by one zero one and two gets added to answer . right ! if i makes this fiveyou see what will happen , answer will be zero and then zero plus one , zero plus two , zeroplus three , zero plus four so on and so for i mean zero plus one is one and then it will be oneplus two is three , three plus three will be six , six plus four will be ten right ? it is going to bethe sum of zero plus one plus two plus three plus four because range of five means zero onetwo three four lot of details learning is always about braking the details in to small chunksand then observing very carefully right ? so let me execute this i get ten perfect . it s for younow to neatly understand what is happening here ok pause the video right now , understandand then come back .i am sure you are back you know understand what exactly this code is doing . let me nowgive you a mind teaser and then let me indent this . i repeat indent this , initially it was herecorrect ? now if i do it like this what will happen ? u know what will happen . this will nowbe part of the for loop , it will increment answer by i and then it will print the answer right ?look at this yea zero one three six ten see its printing zero , zero plus one , zero plus one plustwo , zero plus one plus two plus three , zero plus one plus two plus three plus four and it so onnow magic let me now give more details here print first i numbers when added gives , whenadded gives answer what does this do now ? what will this do now ? anyone ? look at this . oklet me zoom down so that you can see the entire line so answer equal zero for i in range fiveanswer equals answer plus i print first whatever is in quotes will be just printed like that . i thevalue of i will be printed , i numbers when added gives the answer let me run this . first zeronumbers will added give zeroalright , so let us do one more exercise from python for loops . i am now going to display thetables ok ? so initially , i will say t equals input what tables would you like to display ? and iwill take the input that will be t and as and always you know i will say t equals int of t sothat it becomes a number otherwise you know we have seen this already it becomes difficultto handle , it becomes characters , strings otherwise ok ? so now print t simply just like thatlet s see what happens here so that we know w are going in a right way . i input ten here andit says ten but what i want is the ten tables here you see , how do i do that ? print t commaand then there must be a multiplication symbol one comma and then is equal to and then theanswer t into one right ? what s happening here ? observe , let me run this and see . whattables would you like to display ? ten tables . so ten one times is ten is displaying right ? so letme display ten two times is equal to t times two whatever the t is , see what tables would youlike to display ? ten ones are ten , ten twos are twenty so again let me run instead of ten if itype eight it will display eight ones are eight , eight twos are sixteen correct ? let me go up tosome let say , one more so how do i do that ? print let me go to three x three comma equalscomma t times three execute this , this time let me display ten itself , ten ones are ten , ten twosare twenty , ten threes are thirty remember your tables right ? now i want this to be displayedten times as you know for that i may have to use a formula ok , for see how i am going to useit , for i in range ten print t comma x and then here one two three is given right , i want thatto be i here as i varies from zero to ten i comma equals t times i , see the point is you see apattern here the pattern is one two three that pattern is replaced by this formula so how do wedo that ? we do that by replacing this pattern by of for loop here ok ? alright so let me nowbring these things ok so let s see what happens ? i run the file it is showing me some errorthat s because i haven t put a comma here let me put a comma here ok , again run what tabledo you like to display ? ten tables perfect ! it starts from zero you see , that because for loopsstarts from zero . ten zeros zero , ten one times is ten , ten two times it goes up to nine that sbecause , i in range ten means from zero to nine , if you make this eleven and then run ten hereand then you will see it goes up to hundred right ? isn t that fun ? you can now display anytables let me now display two tables perfect three tables perfect , perfect perfect ! four . perfectthat was all tables from two to ten right ? so this is the power of programming where youneed not necessarily display tables from one to ten rather zero to ten you can go on up to anynumber you want by specifying it here . you have now learnt everything of for loop almost ,this much is enough for you to start using for loop , very good .i am now going to give you all a scenario where while loops are seemingly important .assume i am a doctor i have my own clinic , i must treat my patients and assume i am apopular doctor there are a lot of patients and what i do is , i give them the token number , myreceptionist gives them with the token numbers . i start with one two three four five and i goon like this and i treat my patients one after the other . how can i write a program for this ? iwill now write a program for this and put a monitor outside my clinic though which is in thereception area where people can see which token number is being called right now and thatconcerned person come inside . let us see how we can achieve this using a while loop . oknow look at this i will first write the code and then let us understand what this code does ?while c is equal to one print token number n may please come in ok ? perfect . what will thisn be ? it should be a number starting from one and then it should become two it shouldbecome three and so on , so it should first be assign one ok , what is c ? i will tell you in aminute let me assign c to be one so now what i will do is , simply i will say input c equalsinput continue question mark zero score one what do i mean by this ? see you know whathappens here ? c is a number basically ok so i will say int c , ok c is a number . when cis zero it will come here and it will see while c equals one when c is zero , c is not equalto one so it will not pass this loop , it will not come down , it will not execute this but when cis one it will execute this now you have practised this enough right now given that i haveasked you to practice it , you know what while loop is ? while loop simply keep executingwhatever is below while loop , whatever is below while loop , while loop keeps executing thisuntil , until this becomes false , i repeat repeat repeat when the condition given here is truewhere ? whatever is inside this bracket after while when the condition is true it will keepexecuting this , it will keep executing until this becomes false but the moment this becomesfalse it will come out of it ok ? it s like a bomb detonator right ? so it will keep executing thiskeep executing this until this goes false , once this goes false boom it comes out , ok. let metype here print thank you thank you this is the end of our day rather today ok ? beforeanything i will say print hello everyone we are starting , now let s see what happens to this . asi execute this the first line will get executed ok , hello everyone , we are starting , helloeveryone we are starting n becomes one , c becomes one , while c is one , absolutely c isindeed one so you come inside print token number n may please come in , token number onemay please come in . continue continue zero or one if you say one here c will be taken asone but then you see the input always gives c as the string you see we have discussed thismany times right ? so i make it a number ok ? for some time you please ignore this commandyou just by ignore i mean just write it know that you have to write it . with time you willunderstand what that is ? right ! the one big mistake that people do especially teachers teacheverything about programming in one shot it doesn t work you have to have this mac toignore a few details and grasp only the most important things with time . these details willbecome easy on your minds provided you keep looking at it again and again right ? so don tworry much about this we will revisit this sometime later ok , actually we have discussed thisalready but don t worry much about it , it is to convert entity c on to an integer ok fine now icome here and i again go here and then see continues ok ? continue one ok enter , oh oh ! it issaying token number one may please come in . this should not be the case it should saytoken number two may please come in correct ? so what should i do ? i should ensure that iincrement c by one ok , increment not c i meant i am very sorry i must increment n by onewhy ? so that next time when it comes it says token number two may please come in so let mecome here exit this by pressing zero see it exists , in a moment it will be cleat to you , you mayagain execute this print hello we are starting hello everyone we are starting , token numberone may please come in continue zero or one this is for me ok ? if i say one by one i mean theone here is the token number one , the one here is a command to my programme to continueor not ok ? when i say one it says token number two may please come in , so what i will do asa doctor i will treat my patient once that patient is done he walks out for the next patient iwill say i will enter one here enter , token number three may please come in my next patientcomes i treat this little kid and i say bye to the kid and the kid goes out and then i again pressone as a doctor it says token number four may please come in , the next person comes in , itreat that patient and then i keep doing this , keep doing this , keep doing this so , i am a veryhard working medical practicener so i treat some twenty patients or even more i go on i go oni go on you see and finally i arrive at let say thirty six patients and everybody is done . whatdo i do now ? continue zero or one right ? it says continue zero or one i say i am done . let mepress zero enter it comes out .thank you this is the end of the day , why does it day that ?because when you press zero c becomes equal to this right ? and c becomes equal to zeroand when c is not one if it s only one it enters when it is not one it will come out , once itcomes out it will say thank you , this is the end of our day . and that s what happened here , asand always i repeat and i will repeat this many times handover the key idea about leaning aprogramming language , when it comes to a programming language the key idea is repeatedlydo the same programme a few times , delete this programme and re do it again delete it andagain re do it keep doing this until you are very familiar with what is happening where andthen take up more challenges on the same topic and then write your code and there you are ,you would become a expert in no time . right ? take this tip very seriously now close thisscreen and you try writing this programme all by yourself . how would you make this counterincrement and then stop when you ask it to stop by pressing zero ok ? perfect ! see you all .hello guys , welcome to yet another programming screen cast , in this programming screencast we will be teaching you a cool data structure that python provides you namely the listsdon t get don t get terrified by the name data structures it is nothing but a way by which youcan organise your data , you can arrange your data that is what you call as data structurebasically . so list the name is even we use this particular thing list in our day to day life maybe for when you have to for shopping you plan a list of items which you must definitely buy ,off course we do buy items that we remember at that time when you go to a super market orbased on the things that your neighbours in the super market buy off course there are changesin the list but i believe most of us have the habit of taking a smaller list of item that you mustdefinitely buy that , that is they are at most necessities you have also that may be changes as ihave said so the lists in the python also very much similar to that , so this is a flexible datastructure naming that just now i have said you have a plan of your shopping item that youwants to purchase something but as need comes that may be changes in your purchases right ?something like that as and when there is a need you can add or delete items from the list .that s just a flexible data structure , let us see more of it . so to introduce it i will start off witha sort of a recap that you had in your previous week lectures , so sir had introduced theconcept of variables and how you can club variables with print statements i hope youremember that ok , let me give further more hint so that you remember really well . so we hadused the different variables for example we had that , me be open a console alright the consoleis opened now ok so i hope you remember the example that sir has given . we are three tas inthis course t is the ta whose name is so double quotes we will use for a string that is fornames we use double quotes amit is the first ta simran is the second pa and i am the third tavidhya ok sir has used the variable i to denote the instructor sudarshan so this is the examplesir has used to demonstrate the variables . so let me give you another situation , what if youneed to store the details of the students who are taking up the course ? so course students thestrength may vary so we can not say like this like here it s fixed we know that for sure therethree tas so we have used these variables t t t so course students the strength may varyjust as how i had given an example of shopping list you have a plan of buying some stuff butwhen you go to the super market you may buy something additional or you may feel that thisparticular thing is not really of much use to you or you may even some time you may plansomething but you may get something better you may get a replacement there is definitelythere are changes so something like that even here the strength of the students this is notsomething that is really well determined so what if it is determined ? so for example let usconsider a pg class room there may be some twenty students so in that case your solutionwould be s s s up to s maintain some twenty variable . will be idea you will get as anextension of this concept as we already taught you but now a day s things are changing it snot just the class room teachings that happen every where or if you would see even our nptelcourse students strength keeps varying there more people may enrol in the beginning and asweeks go by some people drop out too or by all that what i mean is this is highly variable it snever a case that there are twenty students and there will be twenty students till the end that isnever a case there may be additions or deletions so something like that even though is verymuch similar to our shopping list this is highly variable thing so to handle it we needsomething which is really flexible so for that we will use something called as a list . so let mewrite it , it s called a list . i hope it is visible to you guys ok ? so i have increased the font sizelist , so that we call structure as list which is a flexible data structure where you can add anddelete items really easily that is what you call as a list , so let me let us go ahead with ourshopping example or the student example anything as you wish . i hope shopping example ismore connected to us because most of us will have the habit of maintain a list of things thatyou need to definitely buy so let me take that as an example itself so let me say shopping thatis the name of my list so these are the things i need to buy so , i wanted to have a list so this ishow you create a list please note this , please note this you are using this type of bracketssquare brackets we call them as we are using this kind of brackets in your keyboard this isnear to your alphabet p this key , please see this , this brackets we use to denote list , his is howwe are creating a list . so if i say shopping and just the brackets and empty list by nameshopping is created . so that is the list is available but now items are presented in the list sothat is what is happen happening if you just save this . if you want to insert item say forexample i want to buy bread , coffee , sugar these are something i definitely want to buy sothis is my shopping list as of now ok so if i say enter the list is created , if i just say a nameequal to an you think the square brackets within that i enter the items separated by commasthis is the syntax by which you create the list ok ? so if i want to know what are in myshopping list i will say as usual this is how you had this for this variables print t say amitprint t gave simran print t gave vidhya and so on just as how you had it print command canbe used here as well print shopping if i say print shopping see i am getting the list here ,bread , coffee , sugar but see i don t wanted with this quotes and that square brackets , commasi don t want it in the some tactical format , i want to write in a format that is friendly for us ,how will we write down the shopping list one by one , one below the other right ? so i want toprint it in that fashion , how will i do that ? simple , will use what we had studied in theprevious week our friend loops mainly for loop will be more friendly here , can also try usingthe other loops i leave it as an exercise you try using the other loops most of the task whichcan be done by for loop can be run by while loop as well something like that so you just tryusing while loop as well i will demonstrate using a for loop . so the method is , for the , let mejust recap the for loop how we had used it for numbers . for i in range three what does thisdo ? it will count zero one two , if i say this and a colon see the next line appears indented . iwill say print i ok , let me say enter see i got zero one two so to deal with numbers you hadused a functionality called range dealing with the items of a list is really very simple so let medemonstrate how that is done for item i or item anything for item in the name of the list youhave to give here , what is the name of the list ? shopping . shopping is the name of our list iwill give shopping for item in shopping print item ok. see bread coffee sugar it has displayedthe item just one below the other just as how we would write it in a piece of paper , seeobserve it is very much similar to what you have leant in your previous weeks in fact mucheasier than that as well for numbers you are using this functionality of range for list it is verysimple just use the name of the list for item in shopping this is the intuit name i have givenactually you can give any name here this and this you can give any name but this two has tobe same you can give any name item is intuit even that it is a shopping bag shopping baskettrolley sort of thing given that so things inside it called as items so i had used the name itemso this is how you print the items of the list in this fashion one by one alright , this process ofchecking through each item in the list and printing so let me print the list as such for yourunderstanding once again if i say print shopping just as how i already set print t print t justwe had said like that something like that if i say print shopping it prints in this manner withthe square brackets and quotes something that is computer friendly format not a humanfriendly format to make into human friendly format we are using loops . see what this loopdoes here for item in shopping , it get into the list called shopping and checks over each of theitem , each of the entity present here and it will print that entity the first iteration this is calleditem is assign the value bread so bread is printed here in the next step coffee is coffee isassign to the variable item so coffee is printed in the next step sugar is assign to the variableitem so sugar is printed so this process is called the iteration this is nothing but your iteratingover the list that is you are checking through each item that is present in the list , you arechecking through each element that is present in the list so this is how you iterate over the listthat is you would check through each and every element in the list . ok so i have printed allthe element in the list what if i want to add another element ? i want to add another elementlet say i would say curd , let me say curd so i should use a functionality there is a functionalityavailable for this it is called as append it is an english word only append is nothing butadding to the end so append functionality would add it to the end of the list so if want to addanother item say for example curd i would do it by shopping . append of this is a bracket soinside the bracket give my item is curd , i want to buy curd as well so i have appended it tothe shopping list so we shall try this print shopping we will see what is in the cart ? now seeinitially we had this as our shopping cart that is shopping list bread coffee sugar due to thiscommand appending another item curd your shopping list has become like this bread , coffee ,sugar as before and curd is added to the end of the shopping list ok , this is how i had addedan item so , is this the only way by which we can add an item it is only possible that you cankeep adding at the end what if you want to change the prioritieswhat if you wanted to buy something say oil , you wanted to buy oil , definitely oil is not evena single drop of oil is there in your house and you need to buy oil for sure even if coffee is notavailable sugar is not available you are ok with it but you definitely want oil so you want oilto be pushed to the first part of the list so how would you do that ? there is a method availablefor that as well that is called as insert method that is you insert at the given position , you canspecify at position you need to insert the item so let me say bread is needed for me then iwant oil so and please note that an indexing starts from here this is what called as indexing soi will demonstrate that first then let us go into this thing of inserting the items at somespecific positions ok so if i would say shopping of one this is what you called as an index atthis list shopping at index one what is the element present ? so index is something like aposition holder something like this so by saying one what do you expect do you expect breadwould be printed ? right ? let us see what happens , see coffee is taken that is the second itemi had asked one its printing second item instead of the first item so let me try zero , shoppingof zero let me try see it is now showing the first item so what do you understand from this ?computers count in a different way exactly computers count in a different way the countingstarts from zero , human start counting from one we will say one two three four , four itemsare present the computers will count it as zero one two three . what is the third item ? if weask the human he will say one two three third item sugar , but computer will say zero , one ,two , three , third item curd so , i guess you understand the difference between the computerscounting and the humans counting it differs by one so if you need the second item you shouldsay two minus one , at the index one so indexing , so this is what you call as indexing , index isnothing like a position holder so this is position zero , position one , position two position threeaccording to the computer so this is how the individual elements can be accessed , individualelement can be accessed using indexes indices index using that you can access this elementsok so is there we had printed it using some way already using the for loop so using thisindexing mechanism can be printed using our range function which we are used in numberswhere is that is another way of printing the elements of a list slightly around about waycompare to the simpler way we had done earlier but this is a recap for your rangefunctionality of previous weeks as well so let us see this way of printing each element in thelist let us see it for i in range how many elements are there in our list one two there four forcomputer it is zero one two three range functionality starts counting from zero we want tocount till three so what should be the number given inside it should be four because thisparticular number is when it reach four it will stop counting so it will not consider four so tillthree only it will consider , that what we too wanted so we will set for i in range four print iwill say shopping of i please observe the square bracket are being used here shopping of i ok ,see same thing bread coffee sugar and curd this is printed so this is slightly roundabout waysimpler way is for item in sorry i have to give the space here it s very there is a change incolour which is not visible for item in the list name is shopping , shopping print item see wegot the same thing so this are two different ways by which you can print the items of the listone after the other just like how we write in a piece of paper , for one we just by using avariable inside a list other was using the indices index so when will the index will be highlyuseful is if you want to extract only just few elements in that case indexes will be highlyuseful for example i had given you another instance like students information eight in thebeginning i have given you an example of students information in that case let us assume thatevery student has role number or id number whatever you can say so they have arranged inthat order based on their id number data has been arranged and stored so in that case if youwant to extract the details , if you want to extract the name of the student whose id number istwenty you can use these thing like students of twenty so in our we have four items i want toextract the second item so for second i should say i should say two minus one so index is oneshopping of one this extracts the second item so in our in that case i felt student of id minusone or id in case if you start counting if you say in zero position you have something like thatname let us say heading name has been that s how we generally write so let me say name thenyou start writing student one student two and so on so this is generally write right ? so let usassume in this way only our list has stored items so at zero index we will have this thingname which sort of a header so s student whose id number is one will be at index one ,student at id number two will be at index two this is one way by which you can manage thedifference between a computer and a human spouting . just an idea i have given you can tryimplementing this student information list in any way as you wish so in that cases when youwant this particular specific caleman to be accessed in that case the indexing will comehighly handy let me say as i now given that i have said about indexing , i will come back tothe thing that , i had said already inserting your items at random position that is at a givenspecified position see for example , i remember that i need oil definitely bread definitely ineed next priority is for me is oil coffee may go in a lower priority that is even as coffee isnot available i will not be that sad but oil is definitely needed something like that let usassume this is the scenario so , i want bread oil coffee sugar curd in this order i want my listto be so append as i had shown you already if you would see i had used terminology , i haveused append so , i have used the up arrows as we have said already up arrow is used forhistory look up in case you want to go down you can use the down arrows as well up arrow isfor going to the precious command if you want to move one down just assume that it is like ahistory look up is nothing but like a ladder you can climb up and down the ladder to see whatyou have done in the past ok so i had appended one item let me say i wanted shampoo , iappend shampoo so , i have appended it because of it i want to print the shopping item let meprint it see shampoo got added at the end so is this the only way by which we can do , can wechange the ordering i want it as bread oil coffee and so on i wanted to be like this so how willi insert it for that we have a command called insert let us see it , what this commandspecifically does this ? if you give position and say insert the item it will insert the item intothat position so it will shift the other items automatically see how flexible it is , if you are ifyou had realised something if you are using a variables like i i i for different items and ifyou want to change the priority just assume how much of work you have to do , i i you hadmade coffee and you wanted i to be oil and i to be coffee if you make i equals to coffeethen sugar value will be lost so you have to move it to the next next next so how much ofshifting you have to do man all this is neatly handed by python data structure mainly the list .so let us see inserting the specified position let me insert shopping . insert is the functionalityinsert you need to give the see some help was given index and object is says so its nothingbut object is nothing but a position as i said so position and whole depth not position exactlyas per humans position that is one less you need to give and then the object whatever youwant to insert into your list object is the general terminology python users items object itemsanything you can say so this is the method by which you do you have to give the position firstso i wanted it to be the second position as per humans so it must be index two minus one thatis one , one i need to insert item i say oil i want to insert oil in this basket so i had given it , itcould have got inserted and let us check that as well so see it got inserted correct oil coffeesugar curd shampoo so this as per my priorities see how handy python lists are there is muchmore functionalities that are available in this let us see them as and when the need comes alsowe will give you a hint on whole things that we may be using frequently and as and when theneed comes you can check out our video we will explain also you can check out the pythondocumentation there are a lot of functionalities available in this list let us see somethingwhich may use frequently so this list specifically has stink items see bread oil coffee all thisare distinct items but sometimes some lists may have repetitions for example consider censusdata something like that you have list of all ages of people living in a city something like thatso there will be definitely repetitions right ? you can not say that if a person is thirty years oldis living in the city no other person of thirty years old should live in that city definitely therewill be repetitions so in that case you may be interested in finding how many number ofpeople of specified age group is present in that city for that we have a functionality calledcount let us create that data set from random data set we say ages if the name of our list letme just say twelve , twenty three , thirty four , forty two , fifteen , eighty seven , twelve , sixteen ,twenty five , twenty three , eighty two , fifty seven , seven , three , two , three , one , twenty ok .just assume that this is the list of ages of different people so we had created a list we have adata so in this definitely there are few repetitions as you could see twelve , twelve heresomewhere else could also be same so in that case i want to see how many people of agetwenty five live in this city ? so how will i do that ? i have a functionality called count that isbeen provided by python lists it is use that ages is the name of the list dot count is thefunction inside it you need to give what is the value ? what is the object ? what is the item forwhich you want to see , i said the age is twenty five this what i want to check so i will saytwenty five see it says one so basically in this list just one time the number twenty five occursthat is one person of age twenty five is there in our list . if i say ages of count of twelve let mesay see it shows two because we have twelve here as well as here see we have twice what ifwe given age which is not present in our list for example let me say seventy i don t thinkthere is a seventy year old person in this list , see it says zero so it will return zero which is theelement which you want to check in the list , if you use this functionality it will take thiselement check prove then this how many number of times this element is present in the listand it will return that answer , if it is not present it will return zero see how neat it is thisfunctionality will be useful in one of our upcoming exercises that is why i have taken the dataset where there will be repetitions see how many elements are there in this list ? i want toknow this . can you manually count it ? one two three four five six oh i am getting very tiredshhh its seems too long it s looking like nile river something like that i don t feel like i wantto count it is there a way i can ask python to count and tell me , off course yes ! there is theway that s why you could see my tone was not very sorrow full something like that i amjoyful because there is a way by which i can count how many number of items are there inthis list ? this list is very handy especially in case when we have a lot of data items forexample let us say the student data i said list of students in our online course see there arethousands and thousands of students so manually counting over each name and then sayingthat these many students are present is really difficult checking in our shopping list i havecreated a really small shopping list just with five items so it was easier to count but see evenages data the sample just i said just it is a city but this is would probably be in a street , thisdata could probably belong to a street only . if you take a people of all ages in a city it will bereally much longer than this even this we can not manage manually though real world datamay be grow really really big in that case we have to make use of some functionalities ofpython to make our life simpler so once such functionality helps us find the length of the thatis what it called as length the terminology uses length that is how many number of elementsare present in this list ? we can check that the way is you have to say len that is thefunctionality length of the name of the list see ages it says eighteen there are eighteenelements in this items and let us just if you are sort of is it really a eighteen i need to count it ,let us test with the something that we know shopping list , shopping list has five items as ihave said six oh ! did i had another yeah i added oil yeah fine there are six items see it countsproperly even i made a mistakes humans can make a mistake but computer will not makemistakes so this is the functionality that come handy in many situations so please make a noteof it this is how you find the length of the lists so in that way where we can use the rangefunctionality and indexing facility and print the elements in a list for example let us see ok soi will look up the history see that time i had just four items in my list , i had just four items inmy list ok , see it is printing just four , now i say print shopping , if i just change it here i willnot look up further print shopping if i would say print shopping see there are more than fiveitems so if you manually want to give an number it is difficult so in this case you ant pythonto intelligently alter the number as and when your list grows or shrinks so let us use thelength function here so length of shopping , shopping i need to close it ok , see now you got allthe items so what it does ? it will find the length and it will iterate that many number of timesso it will go that many number of steps so this is the list the length is six so it will go and takethis element , this element this element and every element will be covered so by using thislength functionality and loops you can iterate ever each item in the list this is one way furthersimpler way is as i said is for item in shopping this is really a simpler way because you maynot even think about the range , length and all these things so for each item in shopping aslong as there are items in this list keep printing just as how you give the instruction in englishwith some modification you can do it in python really an easy way ok .alright guys , we have list of ages of different people see there are some ages we have hadchecked using the count functionality let us check once again probably . ages.count of twelvesee it returns two whereas ages.count of seventy it returns zero where as some other valuessay twenty five it returns one twenty three , it returning two see look at the let us print theages so that we can refer it again print ages see these are the values i can not verify itmanually i am believing but still if i want to verify its taking me some time to check whetherthe answer written is right or not ? also i couldn t get an idea of what is the age group ofpeople there living in that city something like that say for example this area has a lot of youthpopulation or this area has a lot of senior citizens something like that some kind of inference icouldn t male out from this data do you think is there some way if i modify this list you caninfer something ? just give it a thought . yes one simple way , if you would thing out is if thedata is sorted that is it is arranged in ascending order or descending order something like thatif it is sorted we can get an idea what is an minimum value what is the maximum value ormay be examine the mid position to get the average of it something like that you can getsome analyses you can give some more idea than having the idea like this if it is sorted that isif it is arranged in some ascending or descending order you can get some more idea so let ussee how can we sort it , there are some sorting algorithms you would have heard of techniqueslike bubble sort quick sort merge sort don t worry if you haven t heard of it nothing itsnothing never not a problem it s not a rocket science don t worry if you haven t heard of ityou can definitely learn it in fact will be pitching some sorting technique in our course aswell also python has a functionality which lets you sort the numbers even if you don t knowany of the sorting techniques just say sort it will sort the numbers for you so let us see howsorting can be done . ages.sort this is the way you will get the sorted list see ages could havebeen sorted now i want to print the sorted functionality so let me say print ages i obviouslyuse the history look ups using the up arrow ok , see now the ages has been sorted now you canverify count of twenty three was two yeah there are two values twenty three i the previous listsince it was distributed some way i couldn t really check if it is correct or not something likethat just not for checking but we can make many analyses the least is one year old kid to theeldest person in the city is eighty seven year old person so here just two senior citizens andtill thirty five it can generally consider as youth so yeah more youth is there in this particularfactious city that we have considered probably because am an youngster who is typing in theages i have list of age that is young it all depends so you can make some analyses right ?that s what is the point . sorting by sorting you can get some analysis will be easier so sortingis one such technique that will make most of your things handy it will make most of yourthings simple your complicated life would be made simplified with the sorting technique sothis i the way how you can sort it in case you want to reverse it what is the method ? that issorted in the reverse sorted fashion sort will generally do it in the ascending order so if youwant the descending order ascending order is nothing but the elements if you would see oneless than two less than three that is if you go in this way from left you will see the numbers inincreasing order like see if you have seven here something less than seven definitely lie to theleft of it , it will never come in the right of it . if the numbers are arranged in that way if youtake any number all numbers less than that will be in the left side and all greater than that willbe on the right side if the numbers are arranged in this fashion then you call numbers thenyou call numbers are arranged in ascending order and if you want the numbers to be arrangedin descending order what is the way ? just think for some time you will get the idea . i hopeyou got the idea , nothing ? just if you would print this thing in the reverse order it isdescending order , descending order is nothing but as i had said you would scan from the leftnumbers will go in the decreasing trend so eighty seven if i say in the reverse order eightyseven , eighty two fifty seven forty two see if at this point forty two the numbers they arebefore it that is if you would read it from the left to right just assume that it is left to right inthat case you will get the numbers on the left will be greater than it and the numbers from theright will be less than it this is true for all numbers in that sequence this is what we call as asequence mathematically , in nothing but a list in that list if all numbers are like this then youcalled as the list is sorted in descending order descending is decreasing order , ascending isincreasing order , ascend and descend they say right ? for mountain if you are climbing up themountain they call it as ascend and climbing down the mountain is called the descend right ?so that s how the names comes ascending order and the descending order so let us see howcan we make it descending order like i had said reversing the list that is by reading in thereverse order you are getting it so can w reverse the list ? yes ! we can there is a functionalitycalled reverse let us see there ages , reverse reverse ok it got reverse so let us print it now seeas i has said it is in the reverse order eighty seven eighty two fifty seven and so on it is in thereverse order it is now in the descending order so by reversing again back you will get theascending order so you alternately keep reversing you will get ascending and descendingorder once you apply sort you will get the ascending order and if you keep reversing you willtravel between ascending and descending order ok this ordering of numbers comes handy inmany situations and please note this method by which you use built in python functionality toperform this sorting operations that is ordering arranging in a particular order that is what wecall as sorting technically sorting operation fine , so let us see some other powerful techniqueusing lists for that let me consider some other data set the student data set that i had said you ,let us have some data ok students data set let me just have some fractious data students equalto some names let me say let use doubles quotes let say arun i will say rajesh i will say forexample harish some three girls akanksha , lakshmi , varsha some names i have taken somelists of students are they first sorted ? i don t think so i had just randomly entered the namessee why do i sort them ? because that s how generally we store right in academic records inan alphabetical order they will be arranged and that is called the attendance order so let mesort them we have just now learnt how to sort apply that technique and then sort so theywould have been sorted so let us print students yeah they have been sorted akanksha harishlakshmi rajesh varsha so these are the students we have in a class just assume that so in thatlet us assign the role numbers to them let us say as i had said you can have it as zerogenerally our role numbers will start from one but computers starts from zero to counter thatyou can either make changes in your programme as you write code in the future or you canintelligently insert some mean values in the zeroth position that is first value that you see isindex zero at zeroth index insert some dummy value then you can manage this as one twothree so let us do the this way of managing this as one two three by inserting a dummy valuein the zeroth position let me say let us insert the course name for example so let me say howwould i insert at specific position we had seen using the insert function right ? so let me saystudents . insert at the position zero , zero is the first position see the computers perspectiveand the humans perspective differ by one so you for first position for humans and zeroth forcomputer so at zeroth position let me insert the course name for example joc this is ourcourse name i have inserted it tight ? now let me print see i have an inserted it doublevariable right and now i wanted to extracted a subset of students what do i mean by that ?three are some six students in my data set in my class basically data set is nothing but in mydata six students i have considered some six random names i have considered there are somesix students i want to extract a subset that is the few of them only i don t want to consideredevery one of them so how would i do that ? this is the special operation called slicing let mewrite that for you slicing .see this is also an english terminology you are cutting the slice of it we say right in englishsomething like that from this whole list slice of bread can say from whole bread pack youtake some slices of bread something like that you assume this your whole bread packet a listare separate a packet you want few slices of the bread something like that you assume so thisis the terminology we call as slicing . so slicing let us see how can that be done so that generalsyntax how you can slice a list is as follows list name and within the square brackets youhave to give start till end plus one please note this syntax especially this end plus one sowhatever the number you give same like your range function it will count one less the endpoint will be counted one less so if you say from role number one to three i want , you shouldsay one to four so that it counts the third person something like that so this is how you shoulddo slicing operations as i said i want one numbers one to four let me say for that what shouldi say ? students starting position is one here we have to give the index please not that startindex this is the sorry here should i be giving the i did again starting index to end index sosee this is start index and end index this is computers perspective you should give thenumbers in the computers perspective here to manage the human and computers perspectivedifferences i have inserted this dummy value at the zeroth index this is one way by which youcan manage or its better i that recommended you guys used to the computers perspective andcode it in this way only and upcoming exercises will also be in that way only we will makeyou familiar with the computers perspective don t worry if you don t feel the comfortable atthis stage , definitely you will get comfortable as you keep practicing . the key thing here ispractice just keep practicing you will find everything is easy for you . fine ok so i want therole numbers from one to four right ? so how would i do that ? from one to four is what iwanted and please note here it is end index plus one because same like your range functionthis functionality the slicing functionality also would count one less than the specified endpoint so you want to count till four then you should specify it as five see let us see , see this iswritten one two three four akanksha arun harish lakshmi this is extracted so we have extractof the slice and please note that it is not necessary that you have to give both these indices thestart and end that is optional if i say students and if i just give colon what happens ? see entirething is taken so what does this mean ? the default value they have some default values itmeans if you haven t specified something what should the computer do ? that has also beendefined in python . for the default value for the start is the actual starting index that is zero thedefault end value is the total length minus one see because there are seven elements in the listso it will be zero one two three four five six so seven minus one , length minus one is thedefault end value zero is the default start value , if you dint give anything if this is also oneway by which you can extract out the entire list . this is slightly roundabout but this wouldactually give you the entire list this is yet another by which you can get the entire list and ifyou just give the starting value and you let end value as such what happens , let us see , see iam giving the third person and i left the end value blank what happens ? see from index threethe third person harish till the end it has taken so whenever you don t give a value it will lookup to the default value and use it so here you haven t given end so it took the default endvalue of the length minus one and it has taken so basically in english this translates to startfrom the third person and go till end this is english translation of this slicing statement . okwhat if you don t give the start value ? simple it will take the same default value zero let ussee that too ok am not giving the start value i will say up to five so up to index five it has tostop that means the four persons it will take see it has taken from the beginning , it hasstopped before the index five see zero one two three four at lakshmi it has stopped see the endvalue is always when it reach five it will skip it , it will not consider five so till four it hasconsidered . so i guess you understand the slicing mechanism that is to extract out the subsetof a list we use this slicing the start value and the end value , end value please note that youhave to give one extra because same like your range function it would stop counting when itreaches this particular given end value , given end value here is five so when it reach indexfive so it stop counting , it had quit it had counted only up to four so you have to make surethat you give the indices such that extract out the parts that you need . any if you don t givestart value the default start value is zero if you don t give end value default end value is , i amsorry i had said that has length minus one it is length see because we are giving one accessright ? till length minus one you wanted to move means you have to give length as theanswer . the default end value is let me write it as commands here default start sorry that is astart index is zero and the default end index is nothing but the length of the list i willhighlight this statement default start index is zero the default end index is the length of the listthese values will be taken only when the user has not specified the value that is see here startis specified , end is not specified so in that case this start value will be taken and since end isnot specified it will look up to the default end value and take that value here end is specifiedstart is not specified so it will take up the default start value only when you don t give anyvalue it will take the default value , if you have given some value it will take the values youhave given ok. so let us see one more thing students of two to five so it has taken indices twothree and four it has just printed that so when you have given the values it will take the valuesthat you gave if you haven t given the values it will take the default values that is what theconcept of default values . if you have some experience of c programming something like thatyou have something called default lock switch case default locks have you heard somethingyou can relate to it , it is very similar to that even if you have haven t heard please don tworry , the concept is if the user has provided something that has to be taken , if nothing isprovided take this particular standard value default can be transferred into standard value , sothese are the standard values that has been defined this will be taken . alright i hope you haveseen the difference operation in list these are not only operation that can be done list , thereare a lot of them you can refer to the documentation online , i would recommended you guysplease try with different kinds of list , different things with numbers names with the floatingpoint values for that you can take the stats calculation for example because if it is fourteenpercent tax then when you multiply by zero point one four you will get some decimal valuesthe floating values we call that in computer science you can get that as well so i would likeyou guys try different data type list with this we cal as data type that is the data is of typeinteger or a floating value is nothing but the decimal point is there so real numbers somethinglike that you , it s a string or a word something like that you try a different type of data s ,different type of list , different type of operation and only by practice you can realise that listsare really flexible and they come handy keep practising thanks for watching the video happylearning .hey hey amith , come we will play a game know i will teach everything come ok ok ,shubudha and suma come let s play a game come come cheer up come . ok see the game iscalled as fiizzbuzz ok , we are six in numbers so the game goes like this , he will start from oneand then two and for all multiples of three will tell fizz and then multiples of five will tellbuzz and multiples of three and five will be fizzbuzz ! yes . so you got it . play ? ok ok. shouldi start ? yeah . one two fizz four buzz fizz seven eight fizz buzz eleven fizz thirteen fourteenfizzbuzz . hey this is so easy know so is it ? ok then , we will check from one not one , youstart from one not one . one zero one fizz one not three , one not four , buzz , one not six , onenot seven , fizz , hey hey ! ! that is fizzbuzz yesss ! actually now it s getting complicated .correct ! yeah so complicated , hey this is a nice game i think i should write a piece of codefor this it will be a kick back for me . why do you think of coding all the time ? go get a lifedude , exactly ! hey this is what i enjoy , will definitely write a code for it . hello , every onetoday i am here to code for fizzbuzz we saw you guys saw me playing that game and i toldthat day that i am going to code for it so let s see how we can code write a programme forfizzbuzz . so first i will start my spyder , so assuming that you have all installed anaconda onyour system , i am using my mac you need to start your spyder so go to your terminal andtype spyder in even though it is same in windows you can go to start and write spyder in yourapplication and you will get a spyder idle and just click on it and the spyder will open so let ssee , so you need to install anaconda first , with anaconda you get spyder idle , without spyderalso you can work on your simple terminal or command prompt but we strongly recommendyou to use spyder because it is very easy for you guys . so i am already created a file namehere fizzbuzz here , if you will just start a spyder you will get a new file here you can save itby name you want so i saved it as fizz buzz now here i will write all my programme forfizzbuzz . okay guys let s do this . so this is the place where i write my programme , this is theplace where all the outputs and console related things will come so i hope you guys know theinterface well anyways you can always google up and look what are the things here so this isthe new ipython console which starts with the spyder in the ipython means instructive pythonso you can visualise things here will see in some other examples in how we can use theipython so here the grid thick python is that you can even do the computation on fly , flymeans in console you can write things and it will give the output so for example , if i writetwo plus three , it will just show me five so , it s better you like that if you does thecomputation on flier that then in c , c where you have to create an dot exe file and you canrun it on your computer which will show you the output here interactive ipython console areworks like this do the computation on fly . so what the fizzbuzz let me explain the fizzbuzzgame again so what we did there suppose a person is saying the number and that number ismultiple of three then that person has to say fizz rather than saying that number at loud sosuppose if i am saying one two and three comes then i have to say fizz or any multiple ofthree comes like if six comes then also i have to say fizz or nine comes then also i have to sayfizz and if the multiple of five comes then i have to say buzz if ten comes i have to say buzzand if multiples of three and five comes for example the number which is divisible by threeand five i have to say fizz buzz for example if fifteen comes i have to say fizz buzz ratherthan just saying fifteen and a person if says rather than saying all these three , if he says thenumber then he is out of the game so what we are going to programme , if a number comeswhich is the multiple of three i have to say fizz if it is a multiple of five i have to say buzz ifit is a multiple of both of three and five i have to say fizz buzz for that i need a loop so what iwill do i will just print a number from one to fifty and check whether my loops work and theni will just divide that number with all my taking care of all the condition i will write thosecondition and i will complete my programme for that first i need a loop . loop the syntax of iassume you know the syntax of loop is very simple and straight for i in range , range is the predefined function in python where it takes the number and prints the range from zero to thatnumber , even negative values it can take but i am taking positive value so suppose if i type ina range fifty then just print the number , it will gives the value from zero to forty nine so itstarts from zero ok zero to forty nine we will get but what i want is print numbers from one tofifty for that i will write for i in range one to fifty one because it is giving always the numberminus one values i will write print i that s it we will get numbers from one to fifty ok greatnow i know how to write a loop so i will just write that loop here i will write for i in rangeone to fifty one ok now i have a number at every iteration of this loop i will get a numberfrom one to fifty one suppose if i get a number which is the multiple of three i have to printfizz rather than that number once i will write there print if condition , for that i need ifcondition i have to check whether the number is divisible by three or not if it is divisible bythree then i have to print fizz i will write if i mod three is equal to zero which means i isdivisible by three print fizz that s it and if it is divisible by five for example the number ten itis divisible by five then i have to print buzz but that i will write if else i mean if it is notdivisible by three but it is divisible by five else if i mod five is equal to zero which means if itis not divisible by three but it is divisible by five print buzz and if it is divisible by both threeand five then i have to write fizz buzz for that i have to write a condition if i mod three isequal to zero and because i need both the condition that is i mod five is equal to zero so if imod three is equal to zero and i mod five is equal to zero it means then the number isdivisible by both three and five and then i have to print , print fizzbuzz that s it we are done solet me click the console here i will just run this programme you can run it from here you cansee that hi am getting fizz buzz fizz buzz fizz buzz fizz fizz something like that i don t knowwhich number is giving me fizz which number is giving me buzz and which is giving me fizzbuzz for that i need to print that number also so i will write the number , i will associate thenumber with their corresponding fizz then in order to print two string plus operation forexample if i want to concatenate see here amit sudarshan with plus operator i can concatenatethese two string it will show me amitsudarshan , hence i want to print i associated with thatnumber means it will show if three is coming it will show three is equal to fizz , it will showlike this three is equal to fizz so it will show like this three is equal to fizz for that what i willdo in the print statement i will first convert the number , number is integer so i have to convertthat number in to a string ok for that i will write str of i for convert my i whatever i amgetting here fifty one into a string with plus operator i will concatenating this string with thefizz , if it is fizz right ? i will copy this and if it is none of this neither fizz nor buzz nor fizzbuzz then i have to write else just print you can just print i also head start i will show youwhat string does for example i file a number x is equal to one two three four if i write str of xit will give me a string and it can always be you can save this also and you know this sting ischaracter only so if you write a two get the value at two array is always starts with zero itshould show me two ok let s get back to the programme everything is complete now i willjust run it and let s see what happens great it s running everything is fine for one i don t haveanything for two nothing three should print fizz ok i am getting fizz i will give a space hereshould look nice , better whatever you programme it should look nice ok we will run it againyeah perfect for one i am getting nothing , for two nothing , three is fizz , four is nothing , fiveis buzz , six is fizz , because it is a multiple of three nine is multiple of three fizz , ten ismultiple of five buzz twelve is multiple of three thirteen fourteen nothing , fifteen is fizz oksee this fifteen i am getting fizz but i suppose to get fizz buzz because fifteen is multiple ofboth three and five so , here is the problem this is the very common problem we get accordingto me and according to you guys also i suppose that this programme is very the logic is veryperfect i don t think there is any flaws in the logic but still i am getting fizz here rather thanfizz buzz i am not getting fizz buzz so what s the problem ? so can you guys guess ? what didi do wrong , in next video i will explain what is the problem and we will see how to correct itand how to write a right programme for this fizzbuzz ? you can post all your problemsregarding this video in discussion form you can also discuss there so i encourage you guys todiscuss this problem on discussion form will see this in next video .hey amith ! yes sir . you have some time ? sure sir . please sit , i stopped you because you looka little worried and you looked a little engrossed in some thought . that s what are youthinking ? yes sir exactly . so i was ready to write a code for a puzzle game i don t knowwhether you have heard about it or heard of it or not , its very famous puzzle i know not verydifficult one but when you try to write a code of it then you get stuck somewhere correct , andit s not only me i tried to google it and i found that many actually more than eighty percentof the people get stuck there and its very surprising that how it is happening ? and why we allof them are getting stuck at that point only ? correct . so you are discourage thinking thatprobably your programming skills are poor , exactly yeah . because of which so have youbecome programming all this while ? yeah yeah i think i am a good programmer . but thisparticular thing as a bouncer coming that s what you are saying , yeah ok so i also personallyfeel that fizzbuzz is slightly hyped on the internet , so historically speaking there is some storybehind fizz buzz i am sure you know of it if not i will just brief you with it . it is believe that awhole lot of programmer so who claimed that who are good programmers can not even writea simple code ok ? ok the simple code in codes a good candidate example for a simple codesis this fizzbuzz as you know you describe it right ? it s some multiple of three and five thatyou want to display in a particular way and like that right ? exactly . let me illustrate whatexactly is the problem . do u know of any tongue twister ? yeah when i was kid i use to knowsome . can you tell me some tongue twister of your choice ? my friend once told me so i willtry . bity bought some butter , but the butter was better so he bought more butter to make thebitter butter better , that s not the exactly the tongue twister good that you made a mistake , iwanted you to make a mistake , is it impossible for you to get this tongue twister some amountof practice required yeah but without practice its plane impossible for you to get this right ?true true . i will give you one another tongue twister . ok. she sells sea shells in the sea shorewe have been narrating this from ages like can you try do narrating this ? can you repeat itone more time ? she sells sea shells in the sea shore she sells sea shells in the sea shore yeahyeah exactly its difficult the point here is that there are certain things that comes by practicecertain things that they are very difficult to do it on the first time right ? a simple sentence likeas good as it gets say that as good as it gets see that s easy , certain things are easy certainthings are difficult i some of this in the fizzbuzz is very hyped a programming example andits of discourages people thinking that they are not very good programmers yeah right ? withpractice i am sure you can do a super fizzbuzz programme too according to me superfizzbuzz you give as input some bunch of numbers and you should display which numberswhich multiples to display and which multiples not to display right ? like a variant of visibleright ? so i think we should not take these things very seriously all that matters here isenormous amount of practice , you keep practicing i am sure fizz buzz is just a very badcandidate example anything for that matter will be a kick off go ok ? so my call for allprogrammers learning especially in our course is that there are going to be questions that arenot going to be straight forward that you will find it difficult to code that s to be perfectly finewith a few attempts you will be able to do it , my sincere request for you all is not to switch onthe timer then coding right ? fizzbuzz is probably difficult for you but given one hours timedo you think you will not be able to solve it , so programming should not be timed accordingto me . forget all the competitive programming challenges . programming according to me isan art it should be treated like an art at least up to the point but you reach that and say you arean expert and then you try competitive programming but until the point you masterprogramming i think you should be slow , you should be deficient and you should not timeyour programming . so do these experiments take an innocent programmer who doesn t knowa whole lot of programming but he is newly introduced to programming some students fromlet say from joc course and gave them good amount of time and motivate him tell him aboutthis fizz buzz and i am sure he can solve it . ok in last videos we saw that the programme wewrote a programme but we think that logic is correct but still we are not getting the desiredoutput so we will see out what s problem in the so you can see here in fifteen i am gettingfizz i should get fizz buzz but i am not getting the fizzbuzz and according to me the logic iscorrect still i am getting fizz only , i should get fizz buzz . actually the problem is that whatwe are doing is whenever a number is coming first we are trying to find whether that numberis multiple of three then if it is not multiple of three then we are checking whether it is amultiple of five and if it is not both the multiple of three and five if it is not multiple of fivethen we are checking that multiple of three and five then , we are showing fizz buzz , now seelet me debug this , let me go through all the numbers suppose if i am getting number three itwill get a three mod three is zero it means that three is divisible by three i will get a fizz . forsix also will show me six mod three is zero six is divisible by three if ten comes then ten isnot divisible by three and ten mod three is not zero reminder is not zero then it will go to thenext condition else ten mod five is zero hence it will print buzz perfect for twelve if twelvecomes twelve mod three is zero ok fine it will show fizz let say fifteen when fifteen comesthe first condition is i mod fifteen is equal to zero which means fifteen mod three is equal tozero yes fifteen mod three is zero so it will just print fizz and get out of the element that s theproblem hence the first the problem is first condition is i mod three its only checking forthree divisibility but we have to check for both three and five if it is divisible by three andfive both then you should print fizzbuzz and then only you check for three and five hence iwill change the conditions here let me re write the code ok so i will write here if i mod threeis equal to zero and i will check for both i mod five is equal to zero and print i plus equal tofizz buzz else if it is not divisible by both then i will check if it is divisible by three if i modthree is equal to zero then i will print let me copy this print fizz else if it is divisible by fivethen print buzz else it means that it is not divisible by three and five just print ok it is alwaysgood to write a function for whatever programme you are writing here i just wrote the logicby code here but it is better if i define a function and then call that function i just intofunction fizz buzz in here i will give the range value let s say python don t take care of theindentation code is huge and you will find difficulties while printing that s why we are usingspyder indentation where it automatically it if you are using some other difficult for you guysto do the indentation or you can use the sub line text also but we recommend you to usespyder this is ok i can call this function from the terminal i will just run this i will call thefunction fizzbuzz and the range i will use this r here again run this we will call the functionfizzbuzz and the range let s check one two fizz four buzz fizz nine is fizz twelve is buzzfifteen is fizzbuzz eighteen is fizz twenty is buzz ok you can even write the function you caneven call the function here that contains fizzbuzz and you can give fifty one and i will runthis cool so we are done with the fizzbuzz programme you can even modify this programmeyou can create your own game something like that you can change the numbers in aconventional fizzbuzz game we use three and five you can use some other numbers someother prime numbers ok we strongly recommend you guys to play with ait and if you aregetting some new question regarding fizzbuzz and new ideas also please discuss on thediscussion form ok it will help other guys also it will create more new ideas for us and foryou guys ok we will meet again good luck all the best .sir , can i speak to you for five minutes ? hey hi ravi , how are you ? i am fine ,something is bothering me so much , i am humming this really melodies hindi songfrom nineties , their hero talk s about heroines anklets and it was shot in a southindian temple i am unable to recall that , will you please help me with that , so a southindian temple and a hindi song , south indian temple and a hindi song , you said in thenineties film , ya nineties , and what was in the lyrics , i don t know hero was praisingheroines anklets or i remember it something to do with heroines anklets , anything inthe lyrics some two three words , no , tried goggling it , sir i tried goggling it but icouldn t find the result appropriate result for that , ok , so its very difficult to find now ,you need know with the lyrics nor do you know can you hum the song ? no . how canwe find now ? ok so maybe we can think of let asks someone may be who knows bothsouth and north , they should know . you are the best example for that , ha ha you havesouth indian friends and north indian friends and you love hindi songs ok thatreminds me ok i have both south indian as well as north indian friends i have loads ofthem on face book , yeah and maybe we should try posting it there one or the otherperson will see it and let s see whether he can answer huh ? that s a great idea oksuper . oh my god ! this is awesome i really want to learn the science behind it let meask the professor . ravi saw what just happened with our little exercise , see all that wedid was we went to face book and we i add a line on your behalf and it was wonderfulto see that is less than ten minutes , ten to eleven minutes i believe , we got the finalanswer what is most surprising there ? is that the first hit was wrong second hit wasalso wrong if i am not wrong right ? the third hit was the song how do you thinkthat this happen ? any guess , see goggle did not help us right ? asking us expert ofbollywood may not be of any help , if you simple say south indian temple ninetiesbollywood song and finally saying that it has some lyrics about the anklet of theheroine may not land you anywhere , what just happened ? i don t know actually i amvery curious w couldn t find it in google and within thirteen minutes we find it inface book , that s right see what just happened is called it s a very popular socialcomputing technique it s about asking people to solve problem and a bunch of peoplecome and solve a problem but then you see we got the answer free of cost we didn tinvested any infrastructure that s because on face book you have a whole lot of wellwishers who don t mind helping you out correct ? i roughly have some five thousandfriends on my friend list and out i am sure not all of them would have come forwardto help me , some of them came forward out of them only a few people knewsomething about this song we have many many friend on my friend list who areoutside india right they may not know anything about bollywood correct ? they offcourse are of no use there are roughly two thousand three thousand people whoprobably watch lot of bollywood songs and a part of them tried helped me out and apart of them could help me out with some inputs out of which one was the rightanswer , right ? this is how social computing works . sir i have a question , do youthink this works every time ? or for every one ? yeah that s a good interesting questionyou need big numbers let s say you have some two hundred friends in your friend listif you try posting this may be ten to fifteen would be interested to talk to you about itand two or three will give you some hits that may not be right , so bigger the numbermore the merrier seems to be here right ? this is precisely how your wikipedia worksthis is precisely how your stack exchange works where you go and post a questionyou will get an answer immediately just the way we got an answer right now , this ishow the even quora works right ? so imagine imagine if you were asking this questionsome twenty years back you wouldn t ever get to a solution , yeah . the only possiblesolution here was face book there are many application where you switch on theapplication on your mobile it will listen to the music of the song and tell you what thesong is but that useless here because you dint know what the song was , you dint evenknow you couldn t even hum the song right ? you just gave some bare minimumdetails and you got the answer . what is more surprising is that you could not googleit , could you ? no . we tried it googling it and it shows up something else , it is no wayclose to the answer correct ? so there are kind of questions where you won t getanswers in google but with your friends help you can get it in face book , that s right ,perfectly . so we can even hypothesise by saying the problems of the world and theproblems of our county , can be outsourced and rather crowd sourced and we can askpeople to talk about it and we might even get the best possible answers , this isprecisely what s goes by the name wisdom of the crowds , where the power of manycan beat the power of one super intellectual . that s very interesting .the professor just now explained the power of crowd , you see crowd is not a bunch ofpeople they are the people who answer my question quora or create articles on wikipediawhich i read how crowd can helpful in many ways . it can help me to find out the number ofgems in this jar or help me to estimate or calculate the weight of this bag . you must bewondering how , let me show you . estimate the number of gems in this jar ? one eighty , twotwenty , four hundred , around six hundred , thousand , five hundred , three hundred may be ,five fifty . it s around fifteen hundred , two thousand , five hundred , five hundred ? ok i expectabove five hundred , two hundred and fifty , fifteen hundred ok , two fifty four hundred , onethousand ten , two hundred only two hundred ? two fifty , two hundred , two hundred , two fifty ,three hundred , three fifty , two sixty three , two seventy five , three hundred , two fifty , twotwenty , one seventy , hundred , seven hundred and twenty , five hundred , six fifty , threehundred probably , one seven eight one , two twenty , seven hundred , what is this all about ?will let you know say two hundred , seven hundred approx , one seventy , five hundred , ok let ssay one ninety seven , two fifty , around two hundred , hundred and fifty , two seventy , twothousand two thousand ? i think two fifty , hundred and twenty five , three fifty , four fifty ,around three twenty , four sixty seven , thousand , three hundred , i will get one after that sure ,if you guess it right , ok then two fifty , six hundred , five hundred , one twenty , two fifty , onefifty , four hundred , five hundred , not more than three fifty , four hundred , four hundred ? threehundred , two fifty , and what about you sir three hundred ok hey guys guess what happened ?there were actually three seventy five gems in the jar and the crowd guessed it right . i knowno bodies guess was exact but if we take the mean of all their guesses it is actually comingout to be close to three seventy five wan na know how ? let me show you . as you all know weconducted an experiment which numbers of people were asked about the number of gems orcandies in the jar , all though nobody guessed it right but still we got the right answer , how ?let us find out . this kind of experiment was first conducted by francis galton in a countryfare , ox weight judging it competition was organised in which around eight hundred ticketswere issued , every participant were asked about the weight of the ox . the actual weight of theox was one one nine eight lbs and if we take the median of all the estimates it came out to beone two zero seven lbs as you can see one two zero seven lbs is very much near to one onenine eight lbs this is the wisdom of crowd , this is the part of crowd . so now i would like toexplain the reason behind it why does wisdom of crowd prove out to be very useful here ? solet us look at this picture we have actual value ok , some people under estimate the actualvalue of the ox and some people over estimate the actual value of the ox . ok the underestimation part and the over estimation part it actually cancels out so what is obtained at theend is the actual value . this is the same principal that is playing behind me . for example wehave given data comprising of minus three minus two minus one zero one two three here wehave median as zero for example zero is the actual value here and some people guessed it onesome people guessed it two and some people guessed it three and some people underestimated the value like minus one minus two minus three ok nut if we take the difference ofthe values of the median here will get minus one , one , minus two , two , minus three and threeand then we take the summation of all these values in at the end get the median of the data ,this is the same principal that is playing behind the wisdom of crowds and this is the sameprincipal that is playing behind the median of the data ok , the under estimation part actuallycancels the over estimation part and the answer that we got from the wisdom of crowd frommany people estimate is actually the actual value of the ox . so as i said over estimation minusunder estimation will comes out to be zero so the answer that is obtained from the estimatesof the crowd is actually the actual value is the true value of the ox . so what we did in ourexperiment was we asked people about the number of candies or gems in the jar , in ourexperiment around seventy five people participated the actual number of gems in the jar werethree hundred seventy five the median of the data that is obtained is three hundred and theaverage of all the estimates that is been obtained is three fifty one so as you can see themedian is not giving us the right answer here , even the average the mean of all the estimatesis giving us the right answer here so according to the recent studies it has been observed thatif we take the other aggregate measures then they can also be prove to be useful in thesekinds of experiment i repeat recent studies have shown that if we take the other aggregatemeasures than these aggregate measure can be prove to be more useful in these kinds ofexperiment . so in these kinds of experiment you have to calculate the number of aggregatemeasures but aggregate measures are main you have to calculate median mean and otherthings so here we calculated the average of all the estimates and that came out to be threefifty one and as you know as you can see three fifty one is close to three seventy five ascompare to the median that is three hundred so here we calculated the average of all theestimate and that came out to be near to actual number of gems here we didn t calculate meanas total number of the estimates some of all the estimates divided by total number of theestimates , we didn t calculated mean by this formula what we did was we calculated tenpercent trimmed mean , what is ten percent trimmed mean ? let us find out . in ten percenttrimmed mean what you have to do is , you have to remove the ten percent smallest and tenpercent largest values the sample that has been obtained by this method you have to calculatethe mean of the sample obtained , yes here we are using ten percent trimmed mean you canuse five percent , eight percent trimmed mean as per your data actually its depends on the databut on our data that we obtained from seventy five people ten percent trimmed mean give usthe right answer gave us the answer that was very near to the actual value , so how can wecalculate ten percent trimmed mean ? first of all you have to remove the ten percent smallestand ten percent largest values , how can you obtained ten percent smallest and ten percentlargest values ? in this particular thing you have to sort the data what do i mean by the sortingthe data ? sorting means arranging the elements in ascending or descending order so if we sortthe data , if we arrange the elements in the ascending order it will be easier to calculate the tenpercent smallest and ten percent largest values and then you can easily remove them from thesample , after that you have to calculate the mean of the sample that has been obtained afterremoving the ten percent smallest and ten percent largest values this is how you can calculatetrimmed mean . so as i already said this is the wisdom of crowd , this is the power of crowd ,these kinds of experiment explains the wisdom of crowds in the better fashion ok so what iswisdom of crowds ? and we look out its definition it is actually the collective opinion ofgroup of individuals , collecting opinion is always better than the expert opinion . yescollective opinion is always better than the expert opinion if we take the expert opinion inthese kinds of experiments it won t be as accurate as collective opinion , you can do thatactually ask the number of gems in the jar from an expert and you can actually ask thenumber of gems in the jar from crowd . the collective opinion of the crowd is always thebetter than the expert opinion . there is another example from a day to day life based onwisdom of crowd and that is wikipedia . wikipedia is a crowd source here any one can writeedit articles as you know anyone can write and edit articles on wikipedia . there is also anencyclopaedia available online called britannica , britannica is curetted by experts andwikipedia is curetted by people like us by the crowd , if we take the comparative study ofwikipedia and britannica recent studies recent research has shown that wikipedia is as gooda britannica , yes this is right , wikipedia is as good as britannica isn t it amazing and anencyclopaedia that has been curetted by crowd by the normal people and an encyclopaediathat has been curetted by the experts you can do the comparative analyses you will get toknow about it that encyclopaedia that has been curetted by crowd is as good encyclopaediathat has been curetted by the experts . so this is another example of wisdom of crowd .so before jumping to the programming part of crowd computing let us try to manuallyanalyse this data , as you know we collected the from seventy five people we have thedata from seventy five people , the guesses of seventy five people as you know theactual number of gents in the jar were three seventy five and if u look at the data ,some people over estimated it some people guessed it seven twenty , one zero onezero and fifteen hundred and two thousand two , but some people also underestimatedit , some people guessed it hundred , one fifty , two hundred , two fifty , three hundred ,so this is the underestimation part many people underestimated the data and manypeople over estimated the data , as i said the over estimation part it cancels the underestimation part , so the average that comes out is actually near to the actual value so ifwe calculate the average of this data let us calculate this basically average from a toa yes , it is coming out to be four twenty six point three seven but guys recallremember that we don t calculate this mean , this mean is basically some of all theestimates divided by total number of estimates what we do here is we calculate thetrimmed mean so i will basically delete this . so how can we calculate the trimmedmean ? trimmed mean is basically you to remove the ten percent smallest and tenpercent largest values it depends on you whether you take ten percent or twentypercent but be careful in your choice , here we will be calculating through ten percenttrimmed mean for ten percent trimmed mean we have to remove the ten percentsmallest and ten percent largest values . how can you do that ? first of all you have tosort the data sort the data means arranging the data in ascending order so here first ofall what i will do is i will sort the data in ascending order , how can you do that in aspreadsheet ? just go to data and click on sort sheet by column a i will just do thatbecause no other columns here so i will just do that hey w have sorted the data as youknow hundred one twenty one fifty one ninety seven you can figure out that this datais sorted in ascending order so now what we have to do is , we have to remove the tenpercent smallest and ten percent largest values and we take the ten percent of seventyfive it comes out to be seven point five i will basically take the floor value so i willremove the seven smallest and seven largest values let us do that so we removehundred , one twenty , one fifty , one fifty , one fifty there are five values have beenremoved so two more are still to go so remove one seventy and one seventy five tooso i have removed seven smallest values , now it s time to remove seven largest valueslet us go till the end and remove the seven largest vales so , i will remove twothousand , one seven eight six , fifteen hundred , fifteen hundred so three more are stillto go will remove this one zero one zero , will remove thousand and will remove seventwenty too so after deleting the ten percent smallest and ten percent largest values thissample has been obtained from one eighty to basically to seven hundred so i will likeyou to calculate the average of this particular sample rather than the previous sampleso will calculate it , will just put the formula here again in this spreadsheet its averagefrom sorry average from a to a exactly so we calculate the average as i said itcame out to be three fifty one . it is basically three fifty one point six and the actualnumber of gems in the jar were three seventy five as you can see that its very verynear to the actual value , it is an amazing concept the wisdom of crowd if we it comesinto play in many of our day to day experiences and many of the things experience solook here as you know we calculated the trimmed mean and the trimmed mean iscome out to be three fifty one point six which is actually very near to three seventyfive that is the actual value , isn t this amazing ?hello everyone , in this programming screen cast i will show you , how can you plotthe estimates of the crowd , so that you can to get to know , which estimates whethermedian , mean was close to the action value , so how can you plot different numberson python , let me show you , for plotting different numbers for plotting any sort ofdata you have to import one library and that is import matplotlib.pyplot you have toimport matplotlib.pyplot i will name it as plt ok , so let me show you how can youplot different numbers i will just write plt.plot and i will pass a list here , so i will passlike one , two , three and four , so let us see our plots first of all you have to save itplot.py . we have a graph here we plot it one two three four , one two three four areplot are plotted on the y axis , let me show you that here it is one two three four , so inthis where you can plot particular data with the help of mat plot lib you must bewondering here we didn t pass any x value , but in python it automatically generatesthe x values if u dint pass any , i repeat in python it automatically generates the x valueif you don t pass any , now i will show you if you want to pass x value then how willit look like , so i will pass one more list and will be like one four nine and sixteen hereone two three four will be the x values and one four nine sixteen will play as the yvalues , so let us see how the plot comes out to be here , so as you can see we changethe y values , so we get one four nine sixteen here the line that has been obtained isnot is not straight it is curved and one two three four are playing as the x values here ,ok this is how you can plot in python through mat plot lib there are many otheroptions that are available you can also use many other option i will let you know oneoption is you can use the labels as x labels and y labels you can actually label the xaxis and y axis , here we will do plt.y label i will write some values this is how youcan label your x axis and y axis , let us see how this happens see we have label heresome values ok since i use the y label it will be shown in y axis you can use also xlabel if you want to use any label in the x axis ok , so this is how you can use the labelsand this is how you can plot through mat plot lib , next if you this is the line graph ifyou want plot in other fashion if you want to plot dotes in other fashion let me showyou how you can do that for example if we if i want to plot in dotes so let us see howcan do that . in plt.plot you can write another argument how do you want to plot thedata , so i will write ro here , if i write ro let us see how the plot come out to be , seethe plot comes to be in the form of red dots , it is one four nine and sixteen , so this isyou can plot in form of dotes , other options are also available for example if youwant to plot in the form of red dashes , so you can write r hyphen hyphen in place ofro now let us run . this is how you can plot in the form of red dashes , i will showyou some other option too for example if you want to plot in the form of blue squaresyou will just write bs will just write bs let us run that , yes here you have plot in theform of blue squares bs stands for blue squares yes it is one four nine and sixteen andthere is one more option that is available that is the form of green triangles you canalso do that let us run that let us run that , so here you the data in the form of greentriangles let us check that , here we have one four nine and sixteen , so in this way youcan plot in the form of red dashes , blue squares and also in the form green triangles ,this is how you can plot the data through mat plot lib in python .here in this programming screen cast i will show you how can you plot the estimates madeby the crowd as i said first of all you have to import the mat plot lob library so , let us importthat , import matplotlob.pyplot as plt her is the estimates added that has been given to us so iwill just plot this array so let us do that plt.plot i will just write the estimate arrays here , let usplot that sorry it is matplotlib so as i said if you don t give the x values python generates the xvalues on its own so since we don t need any sort of x or y values here we just want to showthe estimates here so what i will do here is i will take this estimates array in the x axis and fory axis i will keep it constant i will keep constant y values for all these estimates i repeat i willkeep constant y values for all the estimates for that i have to create another array for exampleanother list i will create like y so for i in range length of estimates i will just append anyconstant value here for example i will take five if so here we need to plot estimates that hadbeen taken in the x axis then we will take y so let us run this programme now , as you can seewe have a straight line here but you want to show the estimates these are discreet values notcontinuous so i will just use ro here or r dash dash i will prefer to use r dash dash , r dash dashin the previous programming screen cast i have explained r dash rash stand for red dash linesso let us run it again so we have the estimates in the form of dash lines red dash lines so nowi want to plot the mean and the medium median of all the estimates so that i can get to knowthat which value is nearer to the actual value so for that as it has been explained in theprevious programming screen cast that , that you have to trim the sample you have to trim theten percent smallest and ten percent largest values so let us do that i just first of all sort theestimes , estimate.sort that will arrange the elements in the ascending order after that i have todecide the trim value that is ten percent in our case so i will just say rim values is equal topoint one into length of estimates , length of estimates now we also have to type cast with toolso i will just do that in now let us trim the values so now estimate is equal to estimatestrimmed values colon it will trim the values from the estimate list we also have to trim thevalues again so let us do that it will start from the trimmed values , in trimmed value in ourcase is seven so it will start from seven and it will go till length of estimates minus tv so iwill just write the colon here length of estimates minus tv so i array the same has beenobtained is from tv from the trimmed value length of estimate minus tv this has beenalready been this has already been explained from the previous programming screen cast sowe are done with the y array we are also done with the estimates array the trim estimatesarray so now let us plot that the trimmed estimates array there is some error let us cut this xand y must have same dimension ok , now we have to append according to the new length ofestimates please note that i will append according to the new length of estimates please notethat the length of estimates has changed so we have to append y according to the new lengthof estimates so let us do that so we have another graph with is showing the estimates pleaseobserve that in the previous graph we had till two thousand but in the new graph we have tillseven hundred because we have appended the values we have trimmed the ten percentsmallest and ten percent largest values so we are done with plotting that so let me now showyou which value is nearer to the actual value , actual value in our case is three seventy five sofirst of all let me plot that i just write plt.plot plus write three seventy five because we aretaking constant values and i will represent it by say green triangle so let us run it again so wehave three seventy five here now let me calculate the mean and median of this data for that iwill import statistics import statistics so it will be like plt.plot first values value isstatistics.mean of the estimates and while i was constant that is why i represent by say reddots let us do that red dots run it again so we have red dot here that is the mean of theestimates and the green dot here that is the actual line let us also plot the median of the dataso i will just write plt.plot statistics . median i just write estimates take y as constant andrepresent it by blue square yes let us run it again so as you can see that blue square that is themedian it is here and the mean that is red dot that is major to the actual value and blue squarethat is the median it is far away from the actual value so actually it depends on the data youhave to calculate many aggregate measures like mean , trim mean and median of the data andwhichever aggregate measure is nearer to the actual value you can take that these kinds ofexperiments work on the aggregate measures i hope this programming screen cast was usefulto you guys and have a nice day happy learning thank you .hey , what did you just order i will give a hint ok oh brownie yeah you are right ok youwill also do it , yeah ! flavour , yeah ! you see what just happened one person asks theother by giving him or her a jumbelled word and says can you tell me the right englishword ? it is actually very complicated why for the following reason . look at the wordrainbow it is rainbow just seven lettered word and when u jumble it looks something likethis are you really one english word which makes sense but if you see all possiblecombination of this letter seven letters there are not just dozens or hundreds there sactually more than five thousands possible combinations with this seven letter so it spractically impossible for a person to guess what a word could be it involves enormousamount of sort of thinking intelligence and seeing through the letters and then putting itin the right order only one among s the five zero four zero possibilities is actually theright word so similarly we can go on asking a random take a random english wordshuffle it and pose it as a challenge right ? as an always let us see how to write acomputer code for this .a person has a word on his mind he shuffles it and asks the other person to guess what thatword would be . this is the game , sounds interesting ? i said always this being the joy ofcomputing course let us play this the fun way using our programming skills . let s get started .before starting up with the programming let me just give you the summary of what the gameis all about , this is nothing but there are two players in the game , player one and player twosay initially we will starts up with player one s turn so player two will have some wording inher mind what the person does is he would re arrange the letters of the words , basically hewould shuffle the words and write those letters in some random order , in some shuffled ordernot the original word exactly he would write the shuffled one and present it to person onewhose turn is at now so this person is presented with the shuffled word , he is supposed toguess what the actual word would be . if he is able to guess he would get a point and thisperson would pose a question to the other person and the game goes like this whoever getsthe maximum number of points is a winner or it may be draw if both get equal number ofpoints this is how the game will go . so with this kind of strategy let s play this game usingout python programming skills . so let s starts with it so we have to play the game so play youhave got , we have to play the game so for this there is a warning that could be seen here itsays undefined name play so we have said we want to play the game what the thing has to bedone we have to define it so let s start defining , define play this is the way by which youwould start a function definition so that is play is something that you want to perform this isnot something that is already known to the computer so you have to define that this is what isa thing you have to do when i say play so you are giving a definition that s why you have touse def and then the name whatever you wished to give so i start my thing so as he would seesecond line appear indented indentation matters here so as long as you maintain this level ofindentation all this would be considered as the tasks to be done if think play is called so let sstart off with what all we need to do so we will have two players may be player one he willhave some name let me say player one name player one name let us input the name input forhim to input we should ask with a suitable message let me start with the message player oneplease enter your name so this is for player one same you have to repeat with player two ,player two name you have to input here input player two please enter your name so alright wehave collected the names of the players so initially both the players will start with zero pointsso let us assign it the points to player one is zero points to player two is zero again and i saidthat the turns will be alternated so one player would pose the question and the other will haveto answer and the next time it is reverse so there are some turns here instead of the playersgiving the question we would have the computer question to both the players so the thing islike the computer is the third party which would give the questions of the same difficulty toboth the players so there would be no biases also with it that is the idea so we will make thecomputer pose the questions and both players will get turns alternately just like how ithappened in the previous scenarios the turns would be alternated and the question will be postby the computer and answer as to be given by the players . so to keep track of whose turn it islet us have some variable or turn initially let it be zero it can be any number its generally apractice in computer science to start counting from zero so that is why we have given zeroalright so this game will go on in definitely until the player one of them has to stop this is thetwo player game definitely we need two players only then competitive spirit will be there aslong as both are willing to play the game would continue in case if one of them wants to stopthen the game would come to an end so we need to continue it definitely that is being takencare of this thing while loop and condition , condition i am given as one that means true sowhile true will always be true and we would end this only when the player wants to stop thatwe will see later . we will be dealing with that too now what should the person do , he has toget the question from the computer , this is basically the computers task , computers task thatwas to be done here what is it doing ? it has to picked word there would be some picked wordcomputer will pick some word so it will have some dictionary from that dictionary it will picksome words so choose that will be a function we will define later so computer is choosingsome word and it is written as picked word so that one word is picked from which dictionaryor from you can considers as it has some list of words from that list it is picking some wordso then it has to create the question this is the task is to create the question , create thequestion so question is created by jumbling the pick word jumbling is nothing but we are justrearranging the letters of the word , you are jumbling the picked word so now once thequestion is ready you can print the question . so far so good now let us come to the playerspart first is should maybe we should start off with the player one as the first player then theplayer two we will alternate it to keep alternating the turns we should keep track of the valueof turn . so turn is set to zero so let it be the case that at turn zero the player one will beplaying at turn one player two will be playing at turn two again player one will play at turnthree player two will play it goes on this way so you would see at the even values of turn it isthe chance of the player one at the odd values it is the chance of player two so to keep trackof even and odd we will use modular operator that is nothing but operator which woulddivide and return the reminder of so to get to know if it is even or odd we can divide the turnvalue by two and see the reminder for all even numbers reminder will divided by two is zeroand for odd numbers the reminder is one so that fact will be making use of it here and we willcode . so as i said we are going to use the modular operator if turn modulo true turn moduloto this equals to zero single equal to is assignment and double equal to is the condition checkup of equalities so this basically what it does is it will check it will check this expression turnone two that is it will take the value of turn divided by two and check the reminder if thatreminder is equal to zero then this segment has to be executed so you have to say that this isthis person turn so let me print a message saying player one name we know the name wehave got the name of the player , player one name this is your turn alright so i have printedthis message so i have to get , i have displayed the question here you would have seen herethere is a statement print question so computer has to printed the question so that hasdisplayed the question so i have to ask what s on my mind so that computer is asking what son my mind so that the computer is asking what s on my mind so it has picked some wordswhat is the actual word co it is asking what s on my wind so you have to get the input for thisquestion the player would given answer that as to be taken as an input so we will do this now .answer is equal to input of what is on my mind so computer has got some word in its mindso that word the player has to guess so that is the question make sense ok this is the questionposted by the computer and for this question the user will give an answer which would beinputted and stored in this variable ans now , if the answer given by the user is exactly equal tothe picked word if this answer is exactly equal to the picked word then you are supposed toincrease his points by one so he gets one point so there will be some points already player onehas score during the run of the game initially it is zero but when the loop goes on as an whenthe loop goes on the points will change for the players may be one player would have guessedlot of words but another one would not have been able to do so there is the chance that adifference between the scores exist so we will retrieve the precious for add one to and make itthe new score so player one point is nothing but his previous point plus one this is his newscore and you have to update him of his new score print your score is like i can say it isstored in this variable points of player one which is stored and we have fetched the new valueand we have displayed in this score after this also if this answer is right then the score will beincremented otherwise you should say that if answer is wrong . hence print the some suitablemessage and say the correct answer it will be i would say better luck next time i thought theword that is stored in the variable picked word so i thought this particular word like this youare displaying the message to the user irrespective of what happens here the next has to behave to ask if he wants to continue the game or not ? so that is for that let us use anothervariable let us call it c , c for continue probably c you take the input from the user if he wantsto continue or not ? so may be continue quit there is two possibilities so let me post a messagepress one to continue and zero to quit so he has to decide if he wants to continue or quit sothis is the message post and for this the user will give an input which will be captured by thevariable c and we have defined zero is for quit we have said to the user that zero is for quit soin case if he says zero that is i want to quit then input c is zero that is he wants to quit thenyou have to thank the user probably you can say you have to thank both of them actuallybecause till some point have time they would have played so you have to thank both of themplayer one name , player two name you have to thank both of them and you have to displaythe points they have scored till now like before this particular word has occurred player twowould have scored some point as well as player one would have got something you have todisplay the somebody . so unique the two points value has you have to tag them by greetingwith their names and showing them the summary of the game till now so you have to thankthem and you end the loop you quit the game , how do you do that ? you use the breakstatement so once this break statement is encountered this break statement once when it isencountered the corresponding while loop would come to an end so that is the game willcome to an end . this is the game ok so if this is for player one this particular thing whateverwe are done till now is for player one next what should i do is for player two the procedure isjust the same as whatever we have for the player one now the changes what we have to do isinstead of player one name player one points we would be using the player two informationthere that s it so let me copy paste everything copied so let me paste it but indentation has totake care of it this has to be done in case if the turn value is odd so for odd turn value it isplayer two s turns so i will have to do this indentation so please take care of the indentation itis in the same column , column nine and this is in the column nine yeah this is in the samecolumn and this thing has to be indented now everything looks perfect right ? so we haveindented this as i said this is not player one this is player two let me make the changes it isplayer two it is player two and thanking message is just the same whenever if anyone wantsto quit the game comes to an end so you have to thank both of them for their participation tillnow as well as show them the summary so thanking part is the same just that updating ofpoints defers from player one and player two because each of them have their own task soyou need to have two different variables to keep track of both the right let me save till here oklet me revise once again what i have done this is for we start of with the playing of the gamehere we will ask for the names of the both the players , player one and player two initialisetheir points zero and to keep track of alternating the turns we use the variable called turn .computer will create a question here instead of the usual way , where two people will create aquestion alternatively so this is just for sake because the with the case humans are playingone person has very good vocabulary and he is picking some very difficult words which isnot very easy for an average person to guess , he is permuting that he is shuffling the word ina difficult way that may be the case and the other person may choose the simple words thatmay create the biased state as you could sense till now so to ensure fairness we will give thetask of creating the question to the computer so the computer is doing this just guessing whatthe jumbled word is , is the task of the players so computer starts here this has to be repeatedcontinuously until players want to quit the game so we are using this particular loop whileone , computer is choosing the word from its list of words randomly it will choose somewords and it will jumbled the picked word and create a question so it is now after creating thequestion it is displaying the question so you have to alternate the turns so i am using modularoperator which would return the reminder after division so for odd numbers it is player twostart even number its player one s turn for odd numbers reminder would be one when dividedby two and for even numbers that is zero divided by two that s that the taken care of here ifturn mod two is equal to zero if it is a even turn then it should be the turn of player onebecause we are starting the turn with zero that is the usual practice in computer science tocount from zero so that is why we are doing it , it s not an issue in case if you start from one aswell you can in fact start from any value , the thing is you should alternate the turns betweenplayer one and player two as long as you use this mod two as your conditions so this will saythis players turn , this is the question has been displayed already what is that the word i haveon my mind ? that is the question post to the player the player has to guess his word . sowhatever is his he will type the guessed word so if that is the correct guess whatever he hasanswered is the exact word the computer has picked then the points will be increased by oneotherwise there is no increase in points he will intimated of the word the computer hasthought and then computer would ask them if you would like to continue the game or quit thegame , if they would like to quit you have to greet them you have to thank them for theirparticipation till now and show them the summary of both their scores and you quit the game ,you are thanking them you are showing the summary and then you are quitting the game thesame goes for player two as well just that updating the points is different see it is the point ofthe player one is updated and points of player two is updated in case if it is the , so in the turnof the corresponding player his points would be updated in case his answer is correct . that ishow this game goes , did you sense any missing gap here , there is a missing gap here alsothere are some missing definition which we need to do , we would do it in the next videos , inthe next video we will see the missing gap and will define and undefined terms now may bechoose jumble all these are intuitive to us but the computer may not know what has to bedone so that we need to define them and it is intuitive to us define these things , that all wewill do it in the next video thanks for watching .alright , in the previous video you would have seen the outline of our play method so what isthe game so we have seen the outline in the previous video may be we will give you a veryquick summary we have two players each have been given zero pints initially and there is avariable turn to alternate their turns the computer would randomly pick the list a word fromlist of words it has jumbled it and then post the question based on whose turn it is player issupposed to guess the word the computer has in its mind he has to give his answer if that isexactly matching with what i computer has thought his point will be increased by one else hewould be hide of the correct answer there is no change in his points and the next thing is askthe player wants to continue the game or not even if one player says i want to quit the gamethe game comes to an end because this is a two player game so the game comes to an end soonce the player says i want to quit you need to update them of status till now and thank themfor their participation and then you quit the game this is what is the outline you have seen tillnow . i said there is some missing gaps in the precious video i hope you would have sensedthe gap let us try fixing it if you would see here the turn value is initialise to zero then if it iseven it is player one s turn odd is player two s turn but have i updated the value of turn ihaven t so that should be done close the missing gap here observe the indentation it has to beexactly indented with this if turn mod two is equals to zero that is one turn is them you haveto increment the value of turn you have to increase the turn is equal to turn plus one so youhave incremented please observe the indentation this is in column nine as well as this is incolumn nine fine so indentation is fine now play method is over so i have what did does is asi had given the outline everything is perfect and while the players turn is over the value ofturn is incremented by one so that the next player can take his turn if you would try running itand turn is equal to zero it is the player one turn to play the game then turn values is increasedso now the new turn value is one so this is the turn of player two at two against it goes toplayer one at three it goes to player two so at every value of turn which is an even numberplayer one gets a chance to play and that odd values player two get chance to play this is howthe game goes but the programme is not yet complete still he first thing is here we have sendchoose the word so the computer has to choose the word from the list of words it has so wehave define what exactly the computer has to do so will do that here let me say define choosethis is something we want the computer to do basically it will have some lists of words sonow let me start off with some random words some random english words let me sayrainbow computer science , computer science basically then programming this may be someword then mathematics let us move away slightly from academics player this is a wordcondition this could be a word reverse some word and one two three four five six seven eightso may be let me have two more words let us make it a list of ten words you may have anynumber of words that s never a problem you can increase it to hundred words thousand wordsyou can have if you have lot of words during the continuous playing of the game it will befun because there is a lot for the computer there is a lot of challenge for the computer tochoose a word then pick any word you can get any word it will be fun so let me say water thisis a water and then we would say boat let me say boat these are the words i have just somerandom words i have given these are the list of words so from this list of words it has torandomly choose a word so for randomly choosing a built in library or random let me importit import random i have imported random library now i can what are all the functionality wefind in the library so i would say random . choice i say randomly you need to choose fromthis list . so the default functionality for it is random.choice so in that random library there is afunction for choice which will pick some element from your list so words is a list of ourwords so you have to pick something from list let me say pick equals random.choice this is apre defined function and then the choice from the list of the words so from this list of wordsyou pick the random word that is what just line means so after the word is picked just returnthis pick so now if you would see choose you say choose the control would come here it seesthe list of words random.choice of words it sees this command so picks random words fromthis list and returns that value that returned value is taken as the picked word that is assigneda picked word so this is how the picked word things works now so we have faced this andthen something which is not defined to the computer is jumbled let us do that now ok i haveto define jumbled , jumble or a given word let me say , you have some word is given to you ,you have to jumble that word that is nothing but the you are shuffling the word or you arerearranging the letters that s what you are doing . so for this as well you have something inrandom library you have some functionality it is called random.sample so you choose somewords from this word you choose some letters from this word how many letters you have topost ? may be actually i need all these letters so length of this particular word so what do i dothis ? i need to choose some number of letters from this word . how many numbers of letters ?basically all the letters i need to choose in some random order , i need to choose all the lettersin some random orders for example let us take one word water , w a t e r there are five lettersand five positions blank positions for our shuffled word i need to choose some letter fromthese five letters so from the five letter word consider all the five letters but the thing is youpick any one letter in a random order so maybe , i may pick tea , so tea is assigned in the firstposition , in for second position from the remaining i will pick one letter may be or so on thisis how random word would be generated and this would be written as a list but what we needit as , we need it as a word so list is nothing but it would written as for example water let mesay t r a w e this is the way it has picked the letters t r a w e will be the five elements in yourlist . but we want to merge those five elements , those five characters and make it as a singleword so we are basically what we want is we need to join those things so for doing this thereis a functionality called join so maybe , i would say join these things and for this joinfunctionality we will generally give a separator that is in case you have a space you terminateyour join there something like that may be if i would have some words where there are somespaces you terminate there , terminate at a place where you need basically if you would havelearnt about string tokenizer this sounds as an complicated terminology that s very simplenothing but if you are i will just give a simple example there is some sentence that has beengiven to you , you need to count how many words are there in the sentence how would you sothat ? count the number of spaces , the space acts as a separator between the words , socounting the number of spaces will give you a hint on how many words are there in thesentence so something like that so space acts as a separator so some separator has to be givenbased on which joining as to occur that is when as soon as you see the separator you performthis operation , perform the join operation , here i don t want to see any specific separator maybe space or a comma or a pull stop on seeing that only i want to perform this operation idon t want to something like that so let me just give the blank character this blankcharacter.join that is don t see anything just keep joining the letters so t r a v a w e is theorder i just randomly said so just keep joining them so just take t again just keep joining rtake the next letter a join take the next letter w join take the next letter e join and this is howthis particular functionality works . so this is basically separator , in case if i give some otherseparator what could happen is only one seeing that particular separation that separator thisparticular operation would be static i don t want that , i want that to be happening irrespectiveof whatever be the character so i just give a blank character this is a syntax that has beendefine so we are following it so let me say this is my jumbled word so after every individualcharacter as been joined i get back to the word let me call that word has the jumbled wordalright so once jumbled word is time you return this jumbled word , so this jumbled word isnothing but your question , so when you say question jumble of pick word the word is takenthe letter of the word are shuffled that is the letters of the word are separated and they arerandomly picked and you could get a list , you join the element of the list to get back a singleword and you return that single word this is how this functionality works . and something elsehave we defined everything , just check once , we are getting the name points and turn choosehas been just now defined then jumbled we just now have defined and now if we havesomething here we don t have to defined yeah thank yeah thank here is needs to be defined ,fine so let s do that as well let s do that . define thank , i have passed player one name playertwo name player one s points and player two s point i have passed these four values so whatshould i do ? i have to print player one name i have to print his name and say your score is ,player ones score i have to display and will have to do the same thing for player two as welllet me copy paste this sorry let me copy let me copy and paste it i just need to do somemodification so that this is player two s name and player two s score has to be and you haveto thank them for their participation till now , maybe i would say thanks for playing ok then iwill have to print let me just say have a nice day this is purely your wish whatever you needto display is nearly your wish i will just print have a nice day . sorry i need to give a bracket .everything looks good let summarise we have define the play functionality we input thenames of two players initially have their points at zero there is a variable turn to track ofwhose turn it is and the turn is alternative that is taken care by this mod two operator the taskof creating the question is given to the computer , the computer will choose from its list ofwords , jumbled the letters of the word then display the question so based on the question andthe turn the player will be given a chance to guess what the actual word is . so the guess willbe taken and it will be compare whether the answer he has given and the actual word is thesame , in case if it is the same his points will be increased by one and it is updated here . he isupdated of his new score here , and then in case if his answer is wrong you just intimate thecorrect answer and don t update the score in here and you will be giving him the chancewhether he wants to continue the game or he wants to quit . this is the two player game so ifone person wants to quit the game comes to an end in case if they choose to quit you have togreet them thank them show them the summary of the game till now and then you quit thegame , each and every functionality for that choosing random word that random library wehad used so from the list of words randomly you pick a word and return it so this is what thechoose functionality does and jumbling is nothing but , you randomly select the letter from theword you keep it in some order and then you list the merge of those letters in different orderwhat you have , what you have at time you merge you join the letters that is what you aredoing here and you return the jumbled words and in thanking this is purely your creativityand this you are updating him of the status till now you are giving the summary of the gamehe has played till now , so you are giving the summary and you greet him with some nice linesbasically this is what you are doing and see there is something that we missed here it s yourscore you need to display the players true score stat playing this game . let me run , play thisalright , player one let me enter your name let me say abc player two xyz some where it iscoding ok this is wrong let me continue this is computer ok score is one , let me continue thisis science computer science ok so as you could see the game is very interesting you can go onand on the thing that makes you difficult is when the number of letters increase as you couldsee here this was difficult for me to guess because there were so many letters here and as thenumber of letters increase the complexity so you try playing by long words in english youtry doing it and there may be some variations in the game as well you can limit the number ofguesses here i am just telling i am giving one chance if it is correct i will increase the pointelse i will say you are wrong may be you can have a variant in which you would give theplayer more chances to play the game he can take some three guesses something like that thecreativity part is all in your hands so creativity sky is the limit please do try different variantsand do discuss in the discussion form of how you have implemented those variants thanks forwatching this video have a nice day .hey avni , how fascinating it is we have a wall power thing cellular body to this form yeah butthis is not a single time process you know it takes millions of years to change into this currentform from a single cellular form and a single cell has a collective sticks with changes withtime , brilliant yeah and the recent studies have shown that the single segment of dna containsa huge amount of information , nice , i would like to stimulate this evolution process throughcompetition . let us try . you saw the conversation between avni and simran , avni is trying toexplain to simran that there is some sort of randomness involved in evolution of species fromone to the other we all know that life started off as amoeba and now we are as homo sapienshumans . the randomness attached to this so called explanation of what intense evolution canactually be stimulated the exact model is little complicated so what will do is we will trystimulating it at a very different level well yes we can stimulate and see how evolution hashappened in fact there is a very popular topic called genetic algorithms just precisely this itlearns from evolution or how amoeba became human being and that very perches one canmimic and used that as a sort of technology to come out with brand new ways ofaccomplishing something . so what we will do is genetic algorithms say is way out of thescope of this course i will try to tell you something which is a very very very tone downversion of genetic algorithms in fact biology s and people who actually know geneticalgorithms might even complaining by saying what am i teaching you people but i amteaching this in keeping in mind of the brand beginners in programming who may not haveany idea of programming , either programming nor biology . but still for its a very interestingtopic to just like that discuss and then write a piece of code . so what we will do is we take ahuge binary strength let say some twenty digit binary strength all of them are zeros the rule issimple , you pick some digit randomly and make zero for one with a same probability youknow how to do this you now are familiar with the random function right you say you importrandom and then you can use a lot of functions within that you are very familiar with tat ,using that you can do this the point is you take some digit in this twenty digit string and incase that digit is a zero you make it one with the small probability keep doing it andeventually you will see all the zeros will become ones . how much time does it take ? it sbased on the length of the string and the probability which you switch zeros to ones soundscomplicated but don t worry the programme is actually very easy once you understand thisyou can in fact go ahead and study what makes the genetic algorithm but again as a asset outof the scope of our joy of computing course which is at the very foundation basic level butyou will have all the interest on earth to go and study and even understand what makesgenetic algorithms , so let us now go ahead and see screen cast of how to execute thisprogram .hey everyone , as you all say i just had a conversation with my friend avni and i am reallyfascinated by this idea of evolution . evolution is actually the change in inheritablecharacteristics over successive generation and how this change happens ? this changehappens through genes , genes have dna and dna have coding information in the form of bedsin the form of zeros and ones and if this information changes if zero becomes one or onebecome zero it actually needs to evolution so i will like to code this particular fact but beforejumping to the programming screen cast of evolution let me give you some prerequisites , firstof all we will be looking at the concept of file handling in python how can you read and writefiles in python ? we will be looking at txt file the files with dot text extensions so let us startwith that . so here i have a file named file one dot txt you can create your own file . so here ismy file i have written hello , how are you in it as you can see hello how are you has beenwritten here i need to read this file and write something in it so how can you do that ? howcan you realise through python ? so first of all you have to open this file so let us do that , wewill just write with open your particular file name , my file name is file one dot txt and asigner name to it for example i will add a sign my file and i have to read that file so i will usea function read here i will just print what has been written in the file so i will just write fileone dot no you have named it my file dot read let us do that see , it has read the file . we wrotehello how are you and it is the reading the file as hello how are you , so it is working forexample now i write , we want to write i am fine in the file so how can you write ? i just usethe write function here for reading the read function and then the same way i will use thewrite function here my file dot write for example i want to write i am fine , ok after thatplease not the fact that you have to close the file so i will just close the file my file dot close ,close function is used to close the function here so let us run it there is some error here that isunsupported operation that is not writeable yes this file is not writeable so i will just write inw mode there are different modes in which you can open the files , r is used for reading modeand w is used for writing mode . so i need to write the file so i just use w mode so let us run itagain now the exception is now the error is not readable so we need to read and write the filesimultaneously so there is another mode that is r plus mode there are various modes in whichyou can open the file , i will use r plus mode r plus mode opens the file read as well as writeplease note this fact so i will run it again . so here we have i am fine now if you read the fileyou have i am fine in this so let me check that , our file was file one dot txt let me open itagain . so since we executed it twice we have i am fine i am fine again in this so let me showyou by zooming it we have i am fine i am fine twice since we ran it twice , so this is how wecan read and write files here so the error we encountered here was that we have to open thefile in particular modes so if we want to open the file in reading mode then you can only read .if you can want to open the file in w mode then you can only write and if it is r plus then youcan read as well as write . so there are many such modes in which you can open the file let usexplore that . for example here we have different modes so here we have different modes wehave r mode in which read mode is used , w in which write mode is used to edit and writenew information to the file and we also have a mode that is appending mode , you observethis fact when i wrote i am fine in the file hello how are you , it got erased off so if we iopened the file in a mode that is in append mode then hello how are you would stay in thefile and i am fine would be appended in the file and next is r plus that we use just use it isuse to read and write the files and yes special read and write mode which is used to handleboth the actions when working with the file . so there are four modes in which you can openthe file first is r that is read mode next is w for write mode third is appending mode in whichyou can append the data in which you can append means add the data to the file ok by noterasing the precious data and the fourth one is the r plus mode that is the special mode if youwant to read and write the file simultaneously . in this way you can do the file handling inpython ,there is another prerequisite that is required for evolution programming screen cast and thatis random library . random library is basically used to generate random numbers , i willexplain you some of the functions in random library , so first of all start with rand in i will justwrite random dot ranint one to five . so as you can see it has generated an integer from one tofive rand int is basically is used to generate a random integer from one to five please note thefact that one to five one and five are includes here it may generate one two three four or fivelet us run it again and see the randomness involved here now it has generated four again ,again it has generated two again four five so as you can see that five is inclusive here that swhy it is generating five . again five four one so basically it has generated every numberexcept three let us run it again nor it has generated three also so random dot ranint is basicallyused to generate the random integer in the given range , in which the both the range areinclusive i use another function here random dot range please specify the range here i willagain specify one to five so let us look at the output of random dot range , sorry its random dotran range so let us do that this is four one three one two two four three as you can see that ithas generated five so ran range basically generated number from one two upper limit minusone it will generate number it will either generate number one two three or four it won tgenerate five because it generated number from lower limit to upper limit minus one . this ishow ran range works . there is another function name random dot random it will generatenumber from zero to one , it will basically generate decimal numbers from zero to one so letus run it . as you can see that it has generated point four five it will if we run it again it hasgenerated point four zero , point eight three , point five three , point six two , point four seven ,point nine two , point six two , point seven three , point eight eight , point eight three , point fivetwo , point zero five four as you can see that every decimal number that has been generatedhere is from zero to one so random for random is basically used to generate random numbersrandom decimal numbers from zero to one . there is another thing involved in random dotranrange let us explore that . and that is for example i want to generate numbers from one tonine so i will write here one comma ten and i want to take a step of two i only want togenerate for example odd numbers so i will write two here it will either generate one threefive seven or nine let us look at this for example it has generated nine , let us check whether itgenerates only odd numbers or not one three one three again odd number again odd numberodd number odd number odd number again odd number odd number odd number as you cansee it is only generating odd numbers so how you can make random dot randrange work likethat , you just need to specify the range and also you also need to specify the step that randomdot randrange has to take for example here i specify two because if it will generate one thenwith the step of two it can only generate random odd numbers so if you want to generaterandom even numbers let us do that too for that i have to start with two then it will generateonly even numbers and i will generate till eleven because ten is also odd number evennumber so let us run it so it has generated eight ten even number even even even even so asyou can see that it is only generating even numbers that s how you can make random dotrandrange to generate even and odd numbers and many others and many other numbers ofyour choice this is how it works . there are many functions involved in random library youcan always google it and explore many other functions so just i will give you brief of that . sohere we have many functions involved . will have random dot choices we have random dotset state get state randrange choice shuffle sample , random dot uniform , random dottriangular , random dot beta i will suggest you to go through all these random library functionsthey are pretty interesting i will give you a demonstration of another function that is randomdot choice let us do that , random dot choice basically generates random numbers from givenlist so i specify the list here for example i specify one two three four so it can only generatednumbers from this particular list that i have specified here so it has generated three one fourtwo as you can see it can only generate number from the particular list , you can also specifythe list for example i will specify the list is my list is equal to any number you can specifyone one , forty five , sixty seven , eighty nine ok so random dot choice you have to generatefrom my list so let us try executing it . so it has generated eighty nine since we gave only fournumbers eleven , forty five , sixty seven , eighty nine it has generated eighty nine run it again ithas generated eleven , eleven again forty five , forty five , eighty nine , eighty nine , forty five asyou can see that it is generating number from the list that is specified , we have specified thelist has eleven , forty five , sixty seven , eighty nine and it is only generating numbers onlyfrom that . so i will encourage you to explore more and more about random libraries it hasmany other instructing functions too .now , we are done with the prerequisites required for to run screen cast of evolution . so let usstart with the programme of evolution . here we are given a dna file name dna underscore datahas explained earlier every evolution process happens through dna and it has some codedinformation in the form of zeros and ones so we are this particular information zeros and onesso first of all we have to read this file that has the coded information i hope that we havewatched the previous programming screen cast in which we explained how to handle filesthrough python . so i will be using that straight away , so i will just write with open my filename is dna underscore txt dna underscore data dot txt as my file . so i will just read it , iread it bit by bit and store it in x so i just write my file dot read as explained read is used toread the file , read function is used to read the file here i will also make x as a list so that wecan use it as a list . we have a list of zeros and ones we need to store it in list so i will justconvert it into list . we have ten thousand beds given in that dna file so i will call it functionon this ten thousand bits so i will just write for i in range zero to ten thousand , i will call afunction evolve here evolve x . now that we are done with reading the file we have alsocreated a list x that stores the dna information i will just call the function evolve on thatparticular list and that is x so i will just define it , define evolve this is called on the functionthis is called on the list x so i will just write index here i want to generate an indexrandomly in the list x i repeat i want to generate an index randomly in the list x so togenerate randomly we use as i explained random library so i will just write random dotrandint we have to generate from zero to length of the x as explained in random dot randintwe have to specify the range and for that range the both limits the upper limit and lower limitthey both are inclusive . then i also need to generate another variable randomly here i willcall it p , i will again use a random int function here random dot randint and i too i need togenerate it from one to hundred so algorithm that we are using here is if this particularvariable p if it will be equal to one then only the change will takes place so i will just writehere if p is equal to is equal to one then only the change will take place if the bed at indexposition at ind is equal to is equal to zero then it will be changed to one is equal to is equal toone . else it will be changed to zero obviously , so i will explain again what we are doing hereis we are generating two variables randomly here first is the index of the variable of theparticular bed in which change has to take place this change actually depends on the variablep which will which will generate randomly if this particular variable p will be equal to onethen only the change at this particular index ind will takes place if x at int is equal to isequal to zero then it will be change to one otherwise it will be changed to zero so first of all itall depends on p. if the p that has been generated randomly here is equal to one then only theparticular bed at ind position in x will be changed the change will takes place . this is howwe are using we are using the evolve function here . so now we are done with reading the filewe are also done with the defining the evolve function here so i will just print here again iwill just print x again so let me do that let me run it again so there is some error that is listindex out of range so i will just look into it , we have ind here and we are generating it fromzero to length of x so here is the problem we generating till length of the x we shouldgenerate it from length of x minus one since we all know that randrange generates therandom value in which the both ints of the range are inclusive the upper limit and the lowerlimit are inclusive and we have in list the numbers that are generated the indices values arealways from zero to length minus one i repeat in list we always have indices values from zeroto length minus one ok. if we have given a list of length five then we have indices in list aszero one two three or four we don t have five here and random dot randed generates randomvalues in which both the ints of range are inclusive so we have to write length as x minusone in this particular case the problem will be solved so let us run it again so we have anarray here again the array the list that we read from that particular file it has come out here soyou can actually print the p and ind values and check whether the changes taken palace ornot so i will just print the p value and see whether the changes are taking part or not so letme print it so it is generating ten thousand times so let me see whether it is whether the valueis one at the particular instance are not so let us look at it we have seventy eight , eighty five ,eighty one till now we have a i haven t encountered one oh here we have one so in thisparticular case we have one so this particular case the change would have taken place ok youcan always try run it and check whether the change is taking place or not we have one againso in this particular case the change will take place otherwise the change will not take placeso please note down the fact in mind so i don t think we have another one here let us check itagain so you can try run this particular algorithm this particular programme and see whetherthe change is taking place or not i hope this programming screen cast is useful to you guyshave a nice day happy leaning .in the last week we presented four cool ideas involving rigorous programming , well it is saidthat programming is a skill which is best acquired by practice . so keep on practicing , we arethere with you in this journey of programming .amit , do you see there are nine squares here , yes sir . so you know how pseudoko works ? yessir i know . right ! this is very similar to pseudoko but you don t have to know pseudoko alsoi am just trying to see if you if i can motivate it through something to know already . here arenine squares one two three four five six seven eight nine can you plug in the nine numbersone two three four five six seven eight and nine here so that each side adds up to the samenumber and each row and column everything whatever whichever way you add should addup to the same number . ok you were saying that you want some programming challengeright ? yeah , yeah . i thought i would start giving you something like this . go ahead try , so ihave to choose the numbers from this set that s right . no repetitions no repetitions allowedyes . the sum should be equal to one particular number right ? correct . the rows all thecolumns , correct . so this you would be surprised to know that this is this is more than twothousand years old . it was invented it was first noted in china and there is very interestinghistory you can look up on the internet but the best part is three cross three is very interestingas you increase the dimension it gets more interesting i will tell you something a lot moreinteresting once you solve this go ahead . firstly do you think it is easy to solve ? i think veryeasy . very easy ? go ahead . ok let me use this number yes two six correct so which would beseven eight fifteen adds up to fifteen so if you right some numbers here even that should addup to fifteen go ahead . six i have used seven i have used two i have used may be you areyeah write something nine then eleven which means should be a four so what happens heretwo plus nine is eleven plus four is fifteen , two plus six is eight , eight plus seven is fifteenprefect ! but then you should put some numbers here so that this adds to fifteen , this adds tofifteen not just that this adds to fifteen , this adds to fifteen oh ! i forgot to tell you even thediagonal should add to fifteen ok go ahead . this is i used nine , four . ok do one thing you goahead and try i will take a break and come back sure sir , once you are done let me know , okgot it perfect . hey amit you have done it , i have been watching you yes perfect , perfect , yesit s a four plus three plus eight which is fifteen perfect . you can write fifteen properly hereand then fifteen here nine plus five plus one fifteen , nine plus six is fifteen ok remove this andyeah fifteen here fifteen here eight plus one plus six , fifteen seven plus five plus three fifteen ,our boy has done it , ok four plus nine plus two fifteen , fifteen look at this nine plus sixfifteen , eight plus two plus five plus eight is fifteen perfect . i will ask you another questionnow this is just one way of doing it , there could be many ways to do this or i don t know thismay be the only way can you tell me if there are many ways of doing this , there can bemultiples solution also yeah why not , oh my god it took me a lot of time to get this solutionalso ha ha ha so give me a chalk so what you can possibly do is you can try writing a piece ofcode as always right ? try to see whatever the total possible ways , how will you go aboutthis ? see i solve this in the brute force way trial and error you mean trial and error correct ? ichange some i put some number ok , check what s the sum is going on right ? with iteration ifound this correct ? for this i can write a code definitely and computer can do it in fraction ofseconds , so i will write a code same brute force way . perfect . but it will give me solutions , allthe solutions , try doing it . definitely . i will tell you something more two things one is onedimension is lower by that i mean , let me look at two cross two board which should besomething like this so can you tell me what would be the version of this problem here , fortwo cross two there were nine squares here so you considered one two three four five sixseven eight nine . for four squares what would you do ? one two three four i will considered .can you quickly try if this is possible with one two three four i am going to give you just twominutes time . go ahead something you will observe one two three four . ok. basically oneshould be there somewhere for sure definitely , ok. diagonal should be same as this one threemay be , do one thing let me write it in bold so you say one here and a three here some shouldbe four this should also be four but you have two and four left this become six , you see youcan try all possibilities you will observe and it is impossible to do it in two cross two , exactlywhile it is not possible to do it in two cross two , it is possible in three cross three andsurprisingly for four cross four it s so difficult that your computer is not enough , ordinarydesktop is not enough to find a solution for four cross four guess why ? think about it , write apiece of code and may be you try explaining why it is not possible for four cross four . sureyeah . good job .hello everyone , today we are going to write a programme for magic square . in the videoyou saw amit was trying to solve magic square of size three cross three and was taking a lotof time because he was trying to solve his solve the magic square using brute force way .which is possible for three cross three square matrix but not possible for let s say five crossfive and seven cross seven and even nine cross nine . so we will see that how we can write aprogramme so that we can solve any kind of magic square in an efficient way , or in an easyway . so we know that in three cross three magic square the sum is actually fifteen so let merevise the rules of magic squares . what you have to do , you have to create let say i give you anumber n you have to create a square of size n cross n such that some of each row is mis my magic number , some of each row should be m , sum of each column should be mand even the diagonals , sum of the diagonals should be m . if it happens then you got themagic square , the question is , is it possible to create a magic square for any number n ? letsee if i give n is equal to three . so my matrix should become three cross three that is itshould have exactly nine elements , n sum of each row should be some m the m could beanything . but it should be unique i mean the sum of each row should be m , each columnshould be m and the diagonal should be m so we will see how we can do it , how we cancreate a programme in python so it can solve any kind of magic square . so will tell you thatthis , the size of i mean n can take any number but it should be odd it should not be evenand we will write a programme for that . before that i will encourage you guys to look at thewikipedia page of magic square it has all the entries regarding magic square and even historyof magic square and even the algorithm to solve the magic square i am going to use thisalgorithm only . to solve to write a programme in python so before i go writing a programmelet me tell you some facts ok see you can see here magic square size three and magic squareof size five we know that what is the magic square of size three that is two seven six nine fiveone four three eight if you sum it then each row is becoming fifteen , six plus seven plus twois fifteen , nine plus five plus one is fifteen and even in diagonals sum both the diagonals sumis fifteen . here is another magic square of size five you can find the sum of each row andeach column it will be sixty five so before we go on writing a programme let me tell yousome fact . fact number one is that for any magic square , for any cross any magic square themagic number is always this which is n into n square plus one whole divided by two so letsay for three cross three magic square n becomes three so square of three is nine plus one isten divide by two five into three is fifteen so magic numbers become fifteen and for magicsquare of size five that is n is five , five square is twenty five , twenty six t which is fifty fiveoh sorry sixty five sorry . yeah , so we are going to use this fact another thing is that wheneveryou see the , whenever you see the magic square we will find a pattern here , the pattern is thatsee the position of one , the position of one is always in the middle a row and last column okwhatever magic square you use , you can even see the magic square of size seven and also youwill find in that a middle row . the one is always in the middle row and the last column . sowe are going to based on that we are going to use this algorithm we are going to define thealgorithm when we are going to use this algorithm to write a program so let s see this . thestep number one is first we have to determine the location of one , so will fix one after thatwill go on go on to other numbers and will fix their positions and by this will try fitting ournumbers and will get our magic square . so first is we know the as i told you in any magicsquare one is located at the position n by two comma n minus one for any general n cross nmatrix square matrix n by two will give me the position of row ok , so for example for three nby two becomes one i am taking the integer number so zero one first row is zero and secondrow is one third row is two so one is this position and n minus one is the column positionwhich is two so second column so am i position of one is this which is first row and secondcolumn . for magic square of size five becomes five by two which is two second row zerofirst zero one two second row and the last column that is n minus one which is four fourthcolumn we are assuming that always we always assume here that the matrix starts with zerocross zero , zero comma zero sorry . ok now after determining the position of one will seewhere , where two lies now see here the position of two here also there is a pattern for twoalso you can see two is here when one is here again the two is here so let s say the position ofi take this in the position of one which is n by two comma n minus one as p comma q letssay the position of one is p comma q this is p comma q this is p this is q then nextnumber which is two is located at p minus one comma q plus one oh see this one is at twocomma four now if you take p minus one which is two minus one is one and q plus one q ishere four , four plus one becomes five now five is not there what is this mean ? so let me tellyou the second line anytime if the calculated row becomes minus one then make it n minusone and if column position becomes n then make it zero . here , column position is becomingn which is five , five is n so you have to make it zero so it will come zero . so now see mylocation is p minus one which was two oh sorry one and q plus one which was zero so twozero oh one zero i am sorry so new location is one zero so i will put my two here so like this iwill do for calculate for other number also now after this i will calculate for three again usingthe same thing now the third step is not the step the third fact is if the calculated positionalways contains the number suppose calculated position i mean already contains a numberthen decrement the column position by two and increment the row position by one . we willsee this how it happens . now the last fact is if any time the row position becomes minus oneand column position becomes n switch it to zero comma n minus two . so i am going to usethese three conditions or facts or algorithm say it is not algorithm because i have denitrify thesteps these are not steps these are facts only so i am going to use these facts as a condition towrite my programme and based on this i will create my magic square so in next video we willsee how you can use these steps to create magic square .so in last video , we saw the conditions which we can follow to find our magic square of anysize n , precisely n should be odd . let me help you with an example to solve , to use thesesteps to find the magic square of size for us three cross three matrix . now here i have a three ,i created a three cross three matrix here x represents the elements which i will write as i willfollow the algorithm and these are the locations of these elements . for example the matrixstarts with zero comma zero which is the location of this element is zero comma zero becausethis is the first row which is zero is been told you the always the first row and first columnwill be zero comma zero please follow this convention , location of this element is zerocomma one , location of this element is zero comma two similarly location of this element isone comma zero because this is the first row location of this element is one comma one ,location of this element in one comma two , location of this element is two comma zero ,location of this element is two comma one and location of this element is two comma two .now let me go to the condition the first step was to find the location of one we know that oneis already always located at the middle row and last column so we find that . see in thisexample the size of the value of n is three because this is the three comma three matrix andwe want to create the magic square of size three cross three . so yeah so let s see the first stepwhich is determining the position of one , since n is three so the location of one is n by twocomma n minus one which is three by two comma three minus one , three by two becomesone integer division and three minus one becomes two . so position of one is one comma two ,so i will put one here awesome , now the next step is to determine the position of two , so forthat what we have to do , will take the last determined location , last determined location is onecomma two is p comma q which becomes p this becomes q and will find the nextposition , position of next element as p minus one comma q plus one so position of twobecomes p minus one which is one minus one and q plus one which is two plus one so itbecomes zero comma three ok. now any time , any time is calculated column positionscolumns position becomes n see here the column position is becoming n , n is three . so makeit zero so i will make it , making it zero it becomes zero comma zero . so i will put two at zerocomma zero , two i will put , i will put zero comma zero ok great so now the next element isthree i have to determine the position of three so i will take last calculated position p commaq this is p this is q and again i will follow the same thing . so the position of three becomes pminus one and q plus on , p minus one is zero minus one and q plus one is zero plus oneit becomes , what does it become ? you should write it here , it becomes minus one comma oneagain i will say the same thing any time the calculated row position becomes minus one hererow position becomes minus one make it n minus one so n minus one means three minusone , so three minus one is two this is as it is two comma one so my position of three is twocomma one , let me see where is two comma one , two comma one is here so here i will writethree great again position of four same algorithm two one as pq two minus one is one , oneplus one is two this i simple one comma two , one comma two i will now see at one commatwo one is already present so what we have to do ? if the calculated position already containsthe number then decrement the column by two and increment the row by one so what i willdo , decrement the column , column position was two determine position was two , sodecrement the column position by two which becomes two minus two is zero and incrementthe row by one , one plus one becomes two at two comma zero i will put four great , positionof five becomes this is pq two minus one , zero comma one so one comma one i will put fivehere , position of six one minus one , one plus one two zero comma two so i write zero commatwo is six , position of seven becomes what is zero minus one into plus one , now this is littlebit tricky . see whenever we saw here see here that zero minus one is becoming minus onewill see this condition that any time if calculated row position become minus one then makeit n minus one we have to check here both the condition is if position of row become isbecoming minus one and the column is becoming n which is three here then you have tofollow this condition that is the fourth one , if anytime row position is becoming minus oneand , and is very important here column becomes n which is to zero comma n minus two so iwill make it to zero comma n minus two three minus two is one so zero comma , at zerocomma one i will put seven ok. now next is eight , eight is that so zero comma one is my pqso zero minus one and one plus one so it becomes minus one and two so i will use thiscondition only that is row is becoming minus one and i will make it n minus one , n minus oneis three minus one which is two so it becomes two comma two , so two comma two i will put ,eight and the last is nine so which two comma two is my pq so two minus one becomes oneand two plus one becomes three so two minus one i don t have any problem with this the row ,the column is becoming three so i will wrap it up so it becomes three becomes zero becomesone comma zero so i will get one comma zero . as you see this was the exactly these were theelements of magic square , you can see here i got the magic square you can find the diagonalsome of diagonal and row and column it is exactly fifty nine , eight plus one plus six is fifteen ,nine plus one plus five is fifteen . so this is the algorithm we are going to use pretty simple .giving me this algorithm i can definitely say that you can write a programme , you can usethe steps and i will encourage you guys to write a programme by your own and you can askany question in discussion form , in the next video i will try to code this , write a programmeusing this algorithm and we will create magic square of this size . if you think you can findanother pattern and you can write so another algorithm please , please , please post it ondiscussion form , it will be very good for us and for other students also . thank you .ok , now we are going to write a programme for matrix square , so what the programmeshould do ? should take an input n and is the number of elements in magic square since it is asquare matrix so the number of elements will become n cross n it will take n and generatesthe magic square . now in last video we saw the condition which you can use , we saw thealgorithm which we can use to create the magic square , so will use that algorithm to write aprogramme . so let s start . as i told you it is better to write a whatever programme you arecreating whatever logic you are creating in a function so that you can use that function manytime rather than just writing in python file its better if you create a function so i will create afunction let s def magic square ok , it will take an argument that the numbers of rows ornumber of columns which is same for a square matrix in magic square . ok in python i need todefine the matrix because the element should be present in the matrix then i can change theelements accordingly so i will define a matrix of size n cross n with initially initial all theelements will be zero all zero so matrix will contain all zero and then as we go as we go downto the algorithm step by step will change the elements from to one from zero to otherelements since let s see if there is a three cross three square matrix so elements will be fromone to nine . for other it could be different but zero will never come because it will alwaysstart from one , so ok let me define the matrix magic square lets see . so for that i need twoloops i will write here for i in range three it means it will go from zero to two , zero one twothen for j in range again three ok , before that let me define an define a variable named magicsquare magic square so it is a list i am using it as a matrix inside this first loop i will define asimple list and which i am not keeping anything there which means whenever this loop is ,whenever i go inside this loop it will create a new variable , a new list and as soon as this loopgets over it will again go to this loop go inside this and again create a new list l so what i willdo inside this j loop ok i will enter the element in l so i will write l dot append , append is toenter the elements in the list so i will append zero so what will happen ? see in the first runwhen the i is zero ok so i become zero so this n is created after this will go inside this loop jloop here j is again becoming zero so for this i am going l dot append zero so first time whenj is zero l has element l will contain l will contain zero then it will go back to j , j becomes onej in range only so it will again append zero so l will contain zero comma zero . again it will goback to loop this j becomes two , two is within the range so again l dot append will run so itwill become zero so l will contain zero comma zero comma zero next time j becomes three ,three is not in range because three is out of index of range three so this loop will break so itwill go to i , now i becomes one and i am not doing anything it so as soon as this beforeending the i loop i have to append this l which l i got that is zero comma zero comma zero inthis magic square so what i will do after this loop but inside the i loop i will magic square dotappend l so what it will do as soon as the j loop gets over the l whatever value i have in l afterthe j loop i will apply it in the magic square . it will become a first loop similarly when thesecond run of ith loop again i will create a second row of using the j loop and i will append itin here magic square ok so the magic square will contain a contain the matrix containing zeroonly zero so i can print this so in order to print this i will just copy this ok you can simplycomment this using the yeah you can simply comment this . so what i will do i will print hereprint magic square i comma j ok let me delete this ok lets run this . so nothing is therebecause i have to call this function so magic square n is what in range i have to put n becausewe are making it generalise programme not for three so for n i will put three here and it isshowing like this zero , zero , zero , zero , zero , zero , zero , zero and i want it to be in a matrixonly so for that in python three what you can do , you can write comma end is equal to likethis it will join the i mean print statement always prints one and then by default it keeps newline character till the end so i will put this it will create , it will print the whole everything ithis loop in one line so in this i will write magic square three ok so what i am getting here iam getting everything so i just write a print statement here print and i am not print anythinggreat , so what s this print statement does it print everything in one line that s why i amgetting everything in one line but after this loop if i just print nothing , nothing means newline character is always there so after this loop after the first loop it will print a new linecharacter and next i will get the next row i mean in next print i will get the next row so this ishow so our matrix is good everything is fine perfect i am getting my three cross three matrixnow this is the way this is the conventional way of creating the matrix python is a very coolway of creating such things , the best thing about python is that you can write loop inside a listalso suppose i can write magic is equal to this is the matrix i want to create at inside this iwill write the loop for i in range three it means for i in range three and i will put here zero itmeans it means for i in range three put zero in this list so it will create , it will create a list ofzero three zeros in a list because i in range put three times i have to put zero in this list nowsame thing i will use like this for i in range put zero and put this list three times , i want thislist three times , three times like this so that i can get my magic square for that put this list forj in range three it means that for j in range three put this list inside this list awesome i got mymagic square . great so you can try this i have already written this loop , these loop forcreating my simple square matrix of zero elements .ok , the first step was to find the location of one so we know that the location of one is alwaysthe middle row and the last column so we i will fix it let me put i is equal to n by two and j isequal to n minus one , you can guess what these are these are the local variable and j are nothave been defined but as soon as they use this warnings will go away so i will not care muchof this ok i will create , i will create a variable name num which i will initialise to n cross n sothat i can use it again , i may not have to calculate it every time i will take count variableinitialise to one , count variable is my elements so as soon as i put elements i will incrementthe count variable so that i can put the next element so first i have to put one then as soon as iput one i will increment the count to two so that i can count again some location ok now ineed to follow some condition multiple times , multiple times means what ? until and unless ido not exhaust all the elements , all the possibilities of this matrix which for example threecross three it is nine , it means that i have to check the condition for nine times exactly ninetimes so i will write a while , while this count is less than equal to num so what this is mean ?until and unless i have put all the all my elements into their location my count will not go tofor example three cross three the count is count becomes more than nine that is ten i have tostop here because i have put all my elements to their respectively locations so i don t have tofollow the conditions again so that s what this is the condition which i am going to follow thewhile loop then let see this as i told you the algorithm that this whenever i find the position ,the position of one is fixed ok whenever i find a position i have to check two things first is ifrow is exceeding row is becoming minus then i have to make it zero or n minus one sorry thiscolumn is becoming n then i have to make it zero but before that the important thing is if rowis becoming minus one and , and , and this is or there is a difference between and , and or , andcolumn becomes n then you have to switch it to zero comma n minus two , this is veryimportant because this is the and condition so it should come first so i will write this so i willwrite if i becomes minus one which is i s and j becomes n then what is this ? i have to followyou write it here condition three condition four yeah ok what is the condition ? i have to makej is equal to n minus two , column is becoming n minus two and row is becoming n minus oneso j comes n minus two yeah and row becomes zero sorry so i becomes zero this is correct okelse if and condition is not followed it means either of , either this is happening or this ishappening let see if j is becoming n column is exceeding so column value is exceeding whenthis is happening what what you have to do is if column is if column position becomes n thenmake it zero ok so i will make j equal to zero so or so this is a or , or condition so i don t haveto write else here because i have to check both things , for any one of this if after checkingthis i will check this also not only this or this . i become less than zero then i is equal to nminus one which is this condition is what row is becoming minus one great , now theseconditions are over , now what else . one more condition is there if i calculate the location butthat location already contains some element then i have to something for that i have to checkif my magic square i don t know why i find even though writing magic square ok if magicsquare location which is i comma j is not equal to zero if it is something else then zero itmeans it already here something ok then i have to put j is equal to let me check the conditionwhat was it ? if the calculated position already contains a number then decrement the columnby two and increment the row nu minus one , so will decrement the column by two and jminus two and i is equal to i plus one and after this it might happen that after calculating afterdoing this the sum of these conditions might follow that either this is happening that is therow is exceeding and column is also row is going to minus one and column is exceeding onlycolumn is exceeding only row is exceeding so i have to check that for that i have to go to thego back to the loop now see this in all this condition i did nothing with the column values ,column values not incremented so if anything is happening with this , i will check thecondition but count will , will not increase so i can do this as many times i as i can so , so forthat i need to check this conditions again so for that i will just write continue what does thismean that ? after doing this it will skip all the rest of these things which is inside the loop andgo back to the while loop and do the things again since the count value is not incremented yetso it means that i am doing the doing everything again without any condition again great sothis is done i have checked it else this means what if it doesn t contain any value it means thatit is empty it means it contain zero i can put i can safely put my element for which i amcalculating the position for that i will write magic square is equal to count value becausecount is my value and i will put count plus one which means count is equal to count plus oneincrement the count value which is my next element this is done everything is done nowwhenever i put an element to its location i have to switch to the second element and i have tofollow the p q wala thing so for now whatever location , whatever location i have calculatedfor this element and take it as p and q and i will follow the p minus one and q minus one qplus one so p minus one means i become i minus one and j becomes j plus one this is it sothis was what ? write it here condition one great we are done with this , this is over . print theelements do you know how to print the elements ? i will copy this just wait one secondawesome this is done i will call this function here , function is magic square i will say threefor three let me run this ok i am getting an error here , type error list in this is must be anintegers or slices not so where it is getting i j ok let see this here i have written i is equal to nby two lets what did i put as n see three by two it is one point five and , and what i am doingusing this as indices of my matrix so one point five doesn t mean anything in list it should beexactly integer for that you can use the integer decision that is three two division sign andtwo equals of course exactly one , so i will put two division signs here that s it let see this tadalet me print one more thing here so that i get the value print the sum of each row slashcolumn slash diagonal is what is it ? put plus here str of n cross sorry n into i need to takethis square for square my operator is two stars into n plus one and bracket . try here m isequal to three into three two one m ok i think you understood what is taken , c i didn t put anymultiplication sign here which is a sin , listen to this sum of oh my god sorry i should run nowplease god awesome , i am getting magic square and my sum let me try this for seven let s seethis awesome this is exactly the magic square you can check it and the sum is one seventyfive let me try this for five one is great so this works , so this was the magic squareprogramme you can try some other algorithm if you find some pattern this is some basicalgorithm which i found on wikipedia you can check it please make sure whenever you findany difficulty let like sometimes it happen you writing a code but you miss something thendot understand what wrong you are done this is very simple code on few lines sixty one sixtyand some add ons so finding mistake here is not very difficult but if you have a thousandlines of code it will be mess it will be very difficult to find any bugged there , its better youalways you can always search for the problems for example this i can search and i can try thishere so it will re direct me to the stack overflow , stack overflow is the best website to insist toyour problem most of your problem will be ensured here and even if some of the problemsare not insured you can ask it and easily get insured here in very less time works like a charmso please make use of it and we are done with the magic square , you can do this programmein many ways this is one of the way so please try finding other way also or you can even usesome other parading for example you can use recursion to make this to create thisprogramme . so thank you every one please posts your queries and other things on discussionform .mario , angry birds , candy crush , i am sure most of you have played these games . well nowit s time to develop a new game through programming .do you know this game ? what game is this ? dobble dobble ! dobble . do you know how toplay this ? yes . then show me , here is the card , here is the another card can you tell me whatis common between this and this ? what is common ? tell me . horse horse , horse horse verygood . very good , now what is common here and here ? can you show me what is common ?ok take your time , ok is only one object common , this and this what is that called ? candlescandles that s right . so the pint is there is only one symbol common in these two cards oneand only one and the game is all about one person asking the other person show me what iscommon between this card and this card ok ? so let us play this further . tatswit you arerecording ! yes i am recording yes video is getting recorded so you better be good . tell mewhat is common here and here ? ohhh click click click what is common ? ok there is one pinkhere which is also here what is that ? now you should find it , i am not give you any hints okok you be silent ok i am silent . ok see something is common here what is that ? something isflies ! i don t know what is here ! this and this , what is that called ? dragon ! a dragon that sright , very good so as you can see there is precisely one symbol common between these twocards , there are eight symbols here and eight symbols here and precisely one symbol iscommon and that happens to be a flying dragon so the game is all about we figuring out whatis that common object given in any two objects , as you can see its very difficult to figure outwhat is common here just like that . there are eight objects here eight objects here you see ,you should compare every eight objects in this card with every eight objects in this card thathappens to be eight into eight sixty four which is of huge space for us to compare and onlyone of them is the right answer . say hi fi say hi fi hi fi give me a hi fi ahh .i think the rules of the game is very clear to you all of you . simply look at these two cardsthey have eight symbols each . this is one game which i am very curious to know why ourmind can not spot the exact commonality between two cards , it feels like the moment you spotit you feel how is that all but it takes the long time to spot it . the best part about the game isthe way it is being made you see the cards are such that . pick any two cards there are roughlyfifty cards in this deck . any two cards that you pick will have precisely one symbol incommon you not have two symbols in common it is not so happen that no symbols arecommon exactly one symbol is common and it s for you to find out what s that is ? so the ruleof the game is very clear . two people are sitting and one person flashes two cards the otherperson should spot the common object , so in this case you see this is the common object .some other two cards you see this is the common object . this is the common object and soonwell this game appears to be simple but actually it is not , wan na play ? let us try to stimulatethe pythonic version of this game . so first of all let me give you a brief introduction of whatdobble game is all about . as you know we have a set of cards here each card has somesymbols on it , each card has definite number of symbols on it in fact if we pick any two cardswe will find the definite number of symbols on it and if you pick any two cards from a lotthey will have only one and one symbol in common . you can clearly observe this here thateach pair of card will have only one and one symbol in common . so this is what dobble gameis all about as we have discussed so how can we realise this through programming ? in factthis is much easier in python so will have two list here list one and list two each list will havedefinite number of symbols and symbols are represented by alphabets so if we have sevenalphabets in list one you must have seven alphabets in list two also so we have definitenumber of symbols and you also need to take care of this fact in mind that each pair of listshould have only one and one alphabet in common this is something that we need to check inprogramming and see how can we play this . for example i have two list here list one and listtwo , list one comprises of the symbols or alphabets agtfc and list two comprises of thealphabet tjypol so as you can see here only one and one alphabet is common and that is tand they have definite number of alphabets in the list , we have six alphabets in list one aswell as six alphabets in list two . this is something that we need to do through python orprogramming so let us start with our programming screen cast .hey , every one as we have discussed we need to have two list here , list one and list two eachlist will comprise of definite number of symbols and there should be only one and only onesymbol in common between these two list as we discussed we will be taking alphabets assymbols here so i will be using a particular string here that is called string dot ascii underscoreletters since this is from string library we will be importing string here . let me print it and showyou as you can see here we have lower case and upper case letters in this particular string wehave a to z from we have a to z in lower case and a to z in upper case , let me zoom it so thatyou can see it properly . you see here we have a to z in lower case letters and a to z in uppercase letters i will be using this particular string for symbols . i will have a symbol list here , sincethis is the string i just convert this particular string to list symbols is equal to list , string dotascii underscore letters so we have our symbols here now we have to generate two more lists iwill call them card one and card two . i will initialise it also so we will be having only fivesymbols in each card because i have initialised the list to five elements to five zeros so first ofall i need to find the positions of the same symbol in card one as well as in card two , i will havetwo variables here first is pos one that will be the same position in card one and next one willbe pos two that will be the same symbol position in card two so i will have random dot randintit will be from zero to five it will generate random numbers zero one two three same way wecan have pos two that will be the same symbol position in card two . so will have random dotrandint from zero to five ok i will write here also pos one and pos two are the same symbolsposition in card one and card two respectively . so we are done with the positions ok so nextwhat will be doing here is will be having a character named same symbol and i will justrandomly choose it from our list that is symbols . you need to if you need to choose from thelist you can use random dot choice as we are using random we should import random here too .so we are don t with the cards we are done with the same symbol , now we need to append thesame symbol in card one as well as in card two ok. so i will have here if pos one is equal to postwo then card two pos one is card two pos two or pos one whatever you want to take you cantake since they are equal , will be equal to same symbol same with card one pos one is equal tosame symbol if they are not equal then we need to take care of some things here so concentratewe will have card one pos one as same symbol as you discussed earlier and in card two at postwo we will save same symbol but at position one in card two we will have another symbol wewill have card one position two will have another symbol so we need to again randomly chooseit from random list symbol , random dot choice symbols and similarly for card two at positionone will have random dot choice symbols aren t we doing something wrong here because if weare choosing from the same list even card one and card two may have the same symbol so weshould remove the same symbol from the list symbols so i just simply write symbols dotremove same symbols . please note the fact why i am doing this here because we don t wantsame symbol to repeat in card one and card two so what we will do here we will just removethe same symbol from the list symbols . even , even we don t want repetitions in the same cardwe don t want the same symbols to repeat in similar in same card . so we also need to removethe other symbols that we are choosing for card one and card two so i will just write heresymbols dot remove card one pos two and here also symbols dot remove card , card two posone . so we are done with position one and position two and we are also done with this particularsymbols that will be there in card one and card two at pos one and pos two . so what about theremaining position apart from the pos one and pos two , will also be appending some symbolshere which are not similar obviously so let us do that . for that i will have a while loop here iwill initialise a variable i while i is less than five ok we need to take care of this fact in mindthat position one and position two shouldn t be here so while i is not equal to pos one and i isnot equal to pos two only then this while loop will execute . so i will have two more charactershere alphabet one and alphabet two so i will write random dot choice from symbols as andalways we should also remove this alphabets from symbols so i will remove this alphabet .symbols dot remove alphabet one and for card two will have alphabet two .. that is random dotchoice , random dot choice symbols symbols dot remove alphabet two . so we are done withgenerating alphabet one as well as alphabet two so next we need to append this in card one andcard two in card one the ith position append alphabet one in card two it ith position appendalphabet two , so we are also done with the remaining position also implement this i , so we aredone with pos one and pos two the same symbol as well as the remaining positions . let mecheck whether the cards that are desired are the desired cards are showing up or not . so we willjust print card one and card two so is to check whether our code is working fine or not . ok letme check , what is common here is s s ok let me check again there is some error list assignmentindex out of range card one pos one so let me check that . we need to print pos one and pos twohere so as to check whether it is taking the correct pos . it s four three it is correct its one , oneis correct , four three is correct , three one is correct yes we have an error here it is taking oneand five also so we will just generate from zero to four , now it s fine so please note the fact thatif we will generate random numbers , random integers from zero to five then it can also generatefive . for example it can generate from zero to five zero one two three four or five so it will justgenerate it from zero to five , zero to four because in list we have assignments from zero tillfour ok so we will generate the random integers from zero to four will write the ranger as zerocomma four please note this fact here . so we are done with the cards now since the player isplaying this game we should also know we should also let him know that whether he has wonor not so i will just write will just input a particular symbol here so ch input ask the user to spotthe similar symbol ok if ch is equal to is equal to same symbol then you just write print rightelse print wrong . so let us try to run this , so we have to spot the similar symbol it is m here yesagain run this we have to spot the similar symbol and that is r , again run similar symbol here isit is difficult to find it is though ok so this is how we can play dobble game through python andi may have been wrong before but please note the fact in mind that if we generate randomintegers from a particular range for example if we write from zero to five then it can alsogenerate five . it can also generate zero that means it can generate zero one two three four five ,the both ends are inclusive so we will just write zero four because we need to have listassignments from zero to four ok please note this fact in mind because we were wrong at thisand other wise the code is working fine , i hope you enjoyed this programming screen casthappy learning .well guys you know i share my birthday with sachin tendulkar i feel so lucky i think it s veryrare for two people to share the same birth date is that so ? let us find out .let me take the list of my friends , eight of my friends namely , rishi aeyathi rishi anamikaakruthi vidya amit and simran . i go to all these eight people and ask them what is your day ofbirth by day i mean monday or tuesday or wednesday thursday friday saturday sundayright ? they all will give me their respective answers hoping that they know their day of birth ,all of us know in fact . they all will give their answers but one thing is for sure that twopeople here would be born on the same day when i ask them i noticed that this was theanswer and you see that there are two people born on the same day as you can see . this islike stating the obvious you take eight people and you ask them what is your day of birth ,what is your day of birth a person can be born in one of these seven days , when you takeeight people definitely for sure you will find two people with the same day of birth . now letme some other experiment let me go on the roads and ask people randomly their dd mm bythis i mean their day of birth and month of birth , dd stroke mm , let me ask a few people andsee if i find two people who were born on the same dd mm , now if i ready to do thisexperiment do you think one can guarantee me of a repetition if i go and talk to forty peoplemay be not . look at the previous example , if i take eight people for sure two people will beborn on the same day but if i ask them dd mm there are three hundred and sixty fivepossibilities , three sixty six possibilities if you include the leap year . unless i have more thanthis number assume , i had some four hundred people then i know some two people will havethe same dd mm if i take less than three sixty five can i guarantee ? may be not . but i willchallenge you all that if you go on the road side and stop forty people who are going by andask them their dd mm in forty or fifty counts you will definitely see two people with the samedd mm you don t believe me come let s go and conduct this excise and check whether what iam saying is right or not ?we just now saw the professor talk about birthday paradox . do you share your birthday withsomeone else ? let s check in the crowd . can i please know your birth date and month ? yeahit s eighteenth december , fifteenth july , fifteenth july ok thank you , birthday is fifteenthjanuary , sixteenth november nineteen ninety four , twenty first august , my birthday is onfifteenth of january , my birthday falls on fifteenth june , we have professor abhinav sir withus , sir may i please know your birth date and month ? so its eleventh of december , hi mamcan i please know your birthday and month ? first of december , nineteenth january , yeah itsfourteenth august , twenty second april , yeah its fifth january , fifth october , thirty firstaugust , thirty first august thank you , twentieth november , sure its twenty third july , forth jan ,fifteenth july , eighteenth july , eighteenth september , mam twenty july , twenty firstdecember , yeah its twenty sixth november , thirteenth march , february twenty , twenty fouraugust , third august , fourteenth of july , twenty second of september , thirteenth march , sixthdecember , eighth december , june twenty ninth , twenty three may , twenty seven june , fifteenmarch , twenty fourth august , twenty first april , its fifteenth august , seventeenth september ,eighth april , eleven june nineteen ninety eight , twenty fifth december nineteen ninety seven ,first january , tenth july , eighth october , fifth october . ok thank you .as you know we collected the birth dates of some fifty people and guess what , we don tneed three sixty six people to encounter the collision . actually we encountered acollision in sample of nine people so let us try to simulate this paradox using a program .before we get into the details of the programme let me give you a brief introduction ofthe programme for birthday paradox for birthday paradox we will be generating thebirth dates randomly i repeat will be generating the birth date randomly and we will notfetch it from the data . we will only generate the birth dates randomly . so now thequestion arises how can we generate birth dates randomly so birth date will begenerated according to the birth month as you know some month comprise of thirty onedays and some month comprise of thirty days so we have january , march , may , july ,august , october and december they comprise of thirty one days we have april juneseptember november they comprise of thirty days so birth date will be generatingaccording to the birth months as we are generating only birth date we are not concernedabout the birth year . yes we are not concerned about the birth year we will be onlygenerating the date and the month that s it . so there is an exception here as you knowfebruary has twenty eight days or twenty nine days , if the given year is a leap year thenthe february has twenty nine days else february has twenty eight days . so how can wedetermine that the given year is a leap here or not ? so our question becomes that . fora leap year most of the years that can be divided by four are leap years you know thisfact . but there is an exception here also century years century years i mean like fivehundred , six hundred , thousand , sixteen hundred , seventeen hundred these are thecentury years . century years are not leap years unless they are divided by four hundred ,that means if we have seventeen hundred it is divided by four but it is not a leap year .because this is a century year ok but if we have sixteen hundred it is divided by fourhundred ok that means sixteen hundred is a century year as well as leap year . so i repeatmost of the years that can be divided by four are leap years but there is an exceptionhere century years are not leap years unless they are divided by four hundred yes unlessthey are divided by four hundred so now i will show you the pseudo code of how todetermine whether the given year is a leap year or not ? so we have first of all we willcheck if the given year is divisible by four hundred then it is definitely a leap year elseif it is divisible by hundred then it is not a leap year . i repeat if it is divisible by hundredthen it is not a leap year ok , else if the year is divisible by four then it is a leap yearand for rest of the cases the given year is not a leap year . so will go through the pseudocode again , first of all you have to check whether the year is divisible by four hundredor not if it is divisible by four hundred then it is a leap year , else if the year is divisibleby hundred that means it is not a leap year else if year is divisible by four then it isdefinitely a leap year else for rest of the cases the given year is not a leap year . so firstof all let me try to code this particular function this particular thing of how to determinewhether the given year is a leap year or not ? so let us do that . so i will just openanaconda spyder and try to code this . so first of all let me start with how to determinewhether the given year is a leap year or not ? so i will just generate here randomly oryou can also make the user input that particular year , so i will just generate it randomlyi hope you know the random library we have already explained it . for example i takethe year from ninety three to twenty eighteen ok ? as we are using random we shouldimport random here too . next is we have to write the pseudo code here not the pseudocode the proper code according to the pseudo code . so let us do that i will use if here ,so first of all i will say if year percent four is equal to is equal to zero ok and yearpercent hundred is not equal to zero then i will use or year percent four hundred is equalto is equal to zero , this is according to the pseudo code that i just now explained , i willrepeat it again century years the years that divisible by four are leap years but there isan exception here century years are not leap years unless they are divided by fourhundred this is the pseudo code that we are using here so after that what i will do is wehave generated the year randomly and we will also return the if condition for the yearif this conditions satisfies that means you have to print given year is a leap year okelse you have to print given year is not a leap year . so we are done with the programmefor leap year so let us try to run it , i will just write leap dot py . given year is not a leapyear so let me try to print the value of year also so that we can get to know whether thegiven year is a actually leap year or not . whether our program working fine or not ? solet us check that twenty sixteen given year is a leap year ? yes you can see that twentysixteen is divisible by four and it is also not a century year so it is a leap year let me tryto run it again we have twenty eighteen , yes twenty eighteen is not a leap year . againso let me try to zoom it so that you can also see ok here we have two thousand five isnot a leap year again two thousand three it is not a leap year again , twenty sixteen yesthis is a leap year again twenty eleven it is not a leap year , two thousand one not a leapyear . so this is how we can code the leap year thing so let us move ahead and try tounderstand the integrities of the programme for birthday paradox . so now that we aredone with the leap year code i hope you understood that code so let us move ahead ok ,here what we are trying to do here is now we have to write a pseudo code generate thebirth dates randomly ok. so as i said different month comprise of different number ofdays so we have to take care of all the months and we have to generate the daysaccordingly so we have here if the given month is february and year is a leap year thenwe have to generate the day randomly from one to twenty nine , if the month is februaryand the year is leap year then we have to generate the day randomly from one to twentynine . if the month is february and the year is not the leap year then we have to generatethe day randomly from one to twenty eight , yes . we have to generate the day randomlyfrom one to twenty eight then if the month divides by two ok , we have monthsnumbered from one to twelve ok , and if it divides by two that means and the month isless than seven that the month is either april or june ok , then we have to generate theday randomly from one to thirty , january february march april and june ok. so this is itfor the month that is less than seven now if the month divides by two and the month isgreater than seven , what we are referring here ? we are referring here , referring to themonth august , october and december then we have to generate the day randomly fromone to thirty one ok now if the month doesn t divide by two and it is less than equal toseven here we are referring to january march may or july these months comprise ofthirty one days , yes these months comprise of thirty one days . now the last conditionis left that is if the month doesn t divide by two and the month is greater than seventhen we have to generate the day randomly from one to thirty , we are referringseptember and november here , we are referring september and november here , pleasenote the fact that we are not checking the condition for february , since we have checkedit at the first place . since we have checked the condition for the february at the firstplace we don t need to check it again . so we will start with february because februaryis an exception here , we have either twenty eight days or twenty nine days in february .after that we are done with february then we can take into count the months thatcomprise of either thirty days or thirty one days . so i repeat here first of all you haveto check whether the month is february and the given year is a leap year or not ok , ifthe given year is a leap year then you have to generate the day randomly from one totwenty nine other wise you have to generate the day randomly from one to twenty eight ,after that you have to take into count the months that comprise of either thirty days orthirty one days . if the month is divisible by two and it is less than seven then you haveto generate the day randomly from one to thirty , if the month is divisible by two andthe month is greater than seven then you have to generate the day randomly from oneto thirty one , if it is not divisible by two and it is less than equal to seven that meanswe are also referring july here , you have to generate the day randomly from one tothirty one and the last case if it is not divisible by two and it is greater than seven thenyou have to generate the day randomly from one to thirty . this is how we are going toproceed in the program , you will get to know more about it when we will write aprogram about birthday paradox .welcome to the programme screen caste of birthday paradox , first of all let us take the birthdates of some fifty people and try to find out the collisions . here we will be generating the birthdates of these fifty people randomly in order to generate the birth dates randomly will importthe library here that is called random . let us take the birthday array on list , now as you have togenerate the birth dated of fifty people will have a while loop here i is equal to zero while i isless than fifty . first of all let us generate the year randomly , year is equal to random dot randint ,randint is the function that is used to generate the integers random , you also need to specify therange in the function randint here i will specify from eighteen ninety five to twenty seventeen ,why i particularly choose eighteen ninety five because the oldest person every lived was onetwenty two years old so if you subtract one twenty two from twenty seventeen you will geteighteen ninety five , that s why we choose eighteen ninety five i am writing here the oldestperson ever lived was one twenty two years old . now we have to check whether this particularyear is leap year or not ? why do we have to check whether this particular year is leap year ornot because in order to generate a particular day we have to check that the particular year is aleap year or not because in the month of february in a leap year we have twenty nine daysotherwise in the month of february we have twenty eight days so we will also check that thegiven year is a leap year or not . in order to check whether the given year the randomly generatedyear is leap year or not we will have if here , if year percent four is equal to is equal to zero andyear percent hundred shouldn t be equal to zero or we can just say that year percent fourhundred is equal to is equal to zero . will have a even here leap this is equal to one if thecondition satisfies else this is equal to zero . now let us generate the month randomly , for monthwe will use the function randint again , month is equal to random dot randint what will be theranger it will be from one to twelve . now we are done with generating year and monthrandomly . let us proceed towards day , now let us generate the day randomly . in order togenerate the days randomly we will have a nested if else loop here for a nested if else loop willhave if month is equal to is equal to two and the given year is the leap year , what do i mean bythis ? is this that the month is february and the given year is a leap year so we will generate theday from one to twenty nine that will be random dot randint from one to twenty nine ? else if ,if month is equal to is equal to two and leap is equal to is equal to zero , if the month is februarybut the given year is not a leap year so will have day is equal to random dot randint as one totwenty eight next we have to check please note that the seventh month and the eight monththey both have thirty one days so we will have to heart quote this to so will have here the monthis equal to is equal to seven or month is equal to is equal to eight will generate the days fromone to thirty one next we have to keep the fact in mine if month percent two is not equal to zeroand the month is less than seven so we will generate the days from one to thirty one you caneasily figure this out , please note the fact you can easily figure this out , why i am writing sobecause if the given month is in odd numbered month and the month is also less than seventhen we can say that we will have to generate the days from one to thirty one . next conditionif it is greater than seven that is the next condition . for that the given month will be a evennumbered month , month two is equal to is equal to zero and month is greater than seven and itis less than twelve too . so we will here day is equal to random dot randint one to thirty one wehave specified the condition for twenty eight , twenty nine , thirty one so the rest of the monthwill obviously comprise of thirty days so we will just have else day is equal to random dotrandint from one to thirty this is done . so we have now the birth date of these fifty people plusplease note the fact , please not this fact in mind that we don t have it in a specified format , weneed to have it in a specified format in order to do that i will generate a , i will import a libraryhere a separate library here that is date time . next we have to convert it into particular formatso i will use the function of date time that date time dot date and i can specify the format herein the round braces will have year month day this is the format i am calling , you can call theany other format but i am calling year month day . then we have day of year , why do we needto find the day of year ? as the professor explained in the lecture that we will only consider thedd mm this is self explanatory if you want to find out the collisions in the birth date we needto only consider the dd mm of different people so we have the dd mm of different people butwe need to generate the day of the year . if you will generate the particular day that the personis born on then we can find out the collisions very easily for example if i am born on secondjanuary ninety three that means i am born on second day of the year in the same way we willgenerate the days of year of these fifty people and try to find out the collisions . in order to getthe day of year , we will just use the simple function here please concentrate we have dd that isdate in a particular format dot timetuple dot tm y day this is the function that is straight awaygive you the date of year ok , if you want to code it you can also code it this will be good practicefor you but for simplicity sake we will only use the function here . now we will increment thei variable so that the while loop can proceed and we will also append this particular day of yearthrough the list birthday , appended day of year that is done next sort this particular list whenthis particular list is ready just sort this . what is sorting ? sorting is basically arranging theelements in ascending or descending order , since we are using the function sort here it willerase the elements in ascending order you can always code it , this will be good exercise for youguys but for simplicity sake we will use the function sort here . now we are done with the codewe just want to print this particular array so that we can get to know the collisions . it will beeasy on our mind to find out the collisions if the array sorts it that s why we are sorting thearray . just print birthday i and increment this while loop . i think we are done with theprogramme and let us try to run this programme . see we have a list of birth dates hereparticularly the day of year , if you want to find the collision lets have the look at the output .we have fifteen fifteen one collision here we have one hundred four one hundred four thesecond collision , two not four two not four that is the third collision and here and i don t thinkwe have another collision here so will have three collisions in this list of thirty people , we canalways increase the number of people here and will get more collisions . let us try to run thisagain if we run this again we have forty eight forty eight one collision seventy two seventy twosecond collision , one eighty eight one eighty eight third collision i don t think so another twoeighty three two righty three forth collision so you can always increase the number of peopleand try to find out the collisions the collisions will increase and you can re run the loop re runthis program again and again you can have different number of collisions too . so this programclearly illustrated the presence of the birthday paradox . i hope this program was useful for youguys and you enjoy it this programming screen cast see you till the next programming screencast thank you .now that we are done with the program of birthday paradox , you must remember we used alibrary name date time minute so let me try to explore this library and show you what else canwe do with library date time , date time library can be used to display even today s date so howcan you do that ? so you just write date time dot date dot today with round braces so it willdisplay the todays date the current date ok you can even segregate the date in terms of yearmonth and date for that what you need to do is , i will just write for that you just need to writedot strftime in round braces you have to specify what do you want to display , i need to displayonly year , just write percent y so it is twenty eighteen next i want to display the month you justwrite b capital b so it has displayed the current month and if i write d it will display the dateso it is thirty first . ok so it can be used to display many other things also so i just go thoughthem first of all if you want to display the week number of the year , week number of the yearhow can you display that . i will just write so that you also keep a track of what we are doing ,week number of the month , how can you do that ? you just write date time again dot date dottoday dot strftime and in round braces you just write capital w percent capital w. so weeknumber of the month is twenty two . i repeat week number of the month is twenty two . so afterthis what can we do ? after that if you want to display week day of the weak so you need towrite , what do you need to write ? i will again write week day of the weak again you have towrite date time dot date dot today dot strftime and in that you write small w percent small wpress enter so week day of the weak is four ok that s how you can use the day time library thereare others thing through which you can also use i will show you one or two examples morefirst as if you want to display the day of year ok , how can you do that ? print day of year forthat again you have to write date time dot date dot today dot strftime and in bracket you writesmall j so let us press enter , day of year is one fifty one . after that you want to display the dayof the month and the day of the week is also possible that is you can also do that so i will justshow you how you can do the day of week ok so let us do day of week for that you just needto write first of all write here day of week yes and how can you do that ? what do you need tochange here ? you need to write percent a capital a that will display day of week . so day ofweek is thursday it is actually thursday today so this is how you can use day time library youcan also use it to display the current time , how can you do that ? i will just show you . you justwrite date time again date time dot now so it display the current time , first of all it will displaythe date and then it will display hours minutes seconds this i show it works date time dot daytime dot now it display the current time . i hope this date time library exploration is useful toyou guys happy leaning .babumoshai , zindagi lambi nahi , badi honi chahiye this is a dialogue from one of myfavourite hindi movie anand , you must be wondering what i am talking ? well this is whatour next joy is all about , movies .i am going to tell you all a nice new game , the game is called guess the movie name . right sothe game is very simple , i will try to write a movie name like this ok ? there is this moviewith one two three four five six seven letters can you guess the name of the movie ?obviously there are gon na be a lot of movies with this with seven letters so i will give you ahint , it s a hollywood movie and a very popular one can you guess ? it s obviously tough , sowhat will do , will go step by step you tell me a letter in the movie if the letter is present in themovie i will writer that letter in the right place . e , e is not there in this movie go on sir take l ,l , l no it s not there , a yeah a is there as the fourth letter in the movie ok , sir take s , s ? s isnot there in the movie , t , t is there , sir i titanic yes perfect . oh ok when i said i , i shouldactually write i here as well but anyway now you understand the rules of the game correct ?so let me play the another game right now ok ? by another game i mean another instance ofthe dame game . alright ? there can be space in between two i will not exclusively write thespace here tat s it ok. ten letters go ahead i , i is not there sit take a , a no it s not there a iscommon so i thought of taking a , a is not here ok it s not there . e e is there , in only oneplace o i think you guessed it , the moment you think you have guessed it tell me ok d no dis not there , sir t , t for tarzan no t is not there s is there s is not there , r r is not there onlygiving me letters that are not here go on d d is not there , n , n is there , k yeah it s a bookphone book no its not phone book this is the book and this is the six letter word sir hint ? hint !it s a very popular hollywood movie so popular that everyone knows it . including a two yearold may be a three year old two year old ok ok from two year old to sixty year old everyoneknows the movie very popular movie dreamt it many a times giving hints is not part of thegame just try to keep them interested , s no , you know what no more letters i think you guysshould guess what is the name of the movie i am sure all my audients over there who arewatching this would have guessed long long back the moment you gave the second word it sso obvious what s the name of the movie sir p is there , p is not there c is there no very veryvery easy so easy that there are very few movies with this second word book , j j yes j is therejumangee ! jumangee ! ! no no no no no jungle book ! jungle book ha ha ha wasn t that easy ?what was confusing for you people ? i never heard of this movie as i guessed it , you haven theard this movie ? no i am not , i have heard but , iit students they don t know what is junglebook movie any ways never mind just kidding ok last last game and let s get started withsome discussion about this this game alright ? ok go ahead space is there between the word ,no . one word , e no e is not there a , a is there s is not there s is not there , r yes r sis thereo , o isn t there , u isn t there aggressively you should guess probably d , d ? no . m , mperfect c , c no , e e no again here audients would have guessed t , t perfect matrix ha haha ha ok so let me ask you people something why was it difficult for you people to guess ?you see there are twenty six possibilities per slot even for a three lettered word there are somany possibilities if it was just three letters something like six letters will be twenty six intotwenty six into twenty six into twenty six that s a huge possibility space and people generallytend to think of all possibilities because there are so many movies with six letters that youwill go on exhausting the list of movies you have watched only one of them will match andthey match slowly the idea is to probably use vowels first because vowels will certainly bethere once vowels are there you can start with abcde and then go till z right ? but the idea ofthe game is to guess it very quickly now he has the question for you all , can you try writing apiece of code can you programme ? and use a let say audients should you start the programmeuser starts the programme and then there is a random dashes that come and then user inputs aletter , the letter is there it should pop up the letters the way i wrote , if it is not there it shouldsay letter not found , how easy or difficult would this game be ? easy to code , easy to code !how will you start off ? what will you do ? i will take an array of the number and the size ofthe array of will be the number if characters present in the movie name i will store the i willalso firstly now firstly don t you think we should have list of movie names for the computer ,right it should have a list of movies name from where it will pick the movie name uniformlyor randomly it should randomly pick , once it picked it should see what are the total number ofdashes assume it picks the movie inception i n c e p t i o n inception is nine letters correct ?you should put nine dashes and then the user inputs z it should say beep no z not found , if heinputs i you must go to the first one and then i inception and you have two i s correct ? itshould display two i s and the remaining stuff should be dashes , you can add in some nicevariety to the game where you can give them points , you give them ten points if they guess itin one go they get ten points every chance they take you should deduct one point that makesthe game interesting right ? so can we try writing a piece of code for this ? let s try .so , how does one go ahead and write a piece of code for this , all you need to do is have a listof movie names , as a python list of movie names which you can modify as per yourrequirements and then you must randomly put a movie name assign it to a variable and thatwill be the secret word and the user will start punching in the letters as in , when she punchesthe letter it should be displayed in this blank spaces . it should be displaced if the letter is thereor not , the idea is to guess the movie name with very few attempts.you would have seen aninteresting game in the last video sir has a movie in his mind he just writes as many numberof blanks as there are number of letters in that movie name the person for playing with sir hasto guess what could be the movie he has in his mind , just filling the blanks is difficult seeeven you would take movie name with five letters say then even for that you have a lot ofpossibilities errors so many movies that could be available with five letters so it is difficultfor the person on the other side to guess what could be the movie he has in his mind so he isgiven the flexibility the person can say i assume that this particular letter is present in themovie name so he can guess one letter at a time so he says whether this letter is present or nothe asks sir basically whether this particular letter is present or not , smart strategy will begenerally to start with vowels because mostly vowels will be present in any name so a e i o uwith the vowels if you start you can open lot of blanks you can open up and you can guess themovie name that is the smart strategy generally we use so for example if i say a i want toguess whether a is present in the movie name so in case if a is present the person who hasposted the question will write a in those blanks wherever a was present in that movie name incase if it is not present he would say it is not present you come up with the next guess otherletter . so , this way by unravelling each and every possibility of letter you try to guess themovie name this is how the game goes , alright ? we have just taken few top rated moviesfrom imdb that is the internal movie data base so let us have a list of those movies here firstas a part of our programming let us have a list of those movies , movies let me have it as a listthe first we had was anand in the second was drishyam and the third was nayakan theforth was anbe sivam so go i have taken the fifth is gol maal the sixth one is vikramvedha so it s vikram vedha the seventh one is black friday the eighth is dangal ninth ismanichithrarhazhu and the tenth one is taare zameen par so may be for each of usersbecause we have to switch between caps and small it would be difficult so let me makeeverything in small letters that just for our ease , it actually doesn t matter may be you canhave all caps or anything as you wish its convenient for me if everything is in small so let memake everything in small letters . i have ten movies i have taken top ten from the imdb , youcan take as many movies as you wish or you can include your favourite movie as per yourwish this list completely up to you , you can have as many the ones which ever you wish youcan have it any ways as you want this list is completely up so we have our list of movies nowlet s play we will start our game . so this thing if you would see here it says undefined nameplay so you say i want to play but the computer doesn t know what to be done if you say playso you have to define what is play ? so you are defining def play this is the particular syntaxto define new functionality if that is if i say play this are the tasks that has to be done , you aredefining it . so we will define what has to be the game we will define basically what has to bedone if someone says play . so here let me say i have two players as you have seen in thevideo there were two players and one person was posting the question here that we make itthe computer posting the question the list of movies we have given are already the list ofmovies from this list the computer is posting the question so just that is the change here andwe will assume the there are two players to play the game so this is the two players gamebasically so we will have player one name i want to each will be having a name it will begood if you would refer them by their name they will feel a personalised thing of playing thepersonalised play they could feel if you use their name instead of just calling player oneplayer two x y something like that you just use their own name it would be good so i have toinput his name so i input it to get the input i should give him a suitable message that pleaseenter your name so only then he can understand what do i actually except in this time and hewill give the proper input so i have to give the message input message that is for thisparticular message , read this message and give your input something like that what could igive ? i can give player one please enter sorry enter your name , i have asked his name thesame has to be done for player two as well so let me copy paste it i am sorry i will copy pastethis let me copy and let me paste here , the only change here is it s player two not the playerone again it should be player two and here to we need a different variable that s why there is awarning ps here that is that s the same name there is a warning that you could see here thiswarning appears because there are two things with the same name p one you had used earlierp one name and the same p one name you had used earlier so if i change it may be thisparticular thing will be resolved and now this warning is because it is assigned but it is neverused but this will be used in the upcoming part of the code but that would be taken care ofthat would be fixed this particular warning symbol that is appearing here would be fixed asthe code proceeds . so let us so let us start off with the next part so for both the playersinitially we will have zero points so let me initialise that points for player one is zero pointsfor player two is also zero so i have initialised and if you would see we alternate the turns ofthe players like may be player one gets a chance to guess the movie name the next would goto the next player this would be an interesting variant if you would alternate and see who getsthe highest score probably there are other variants may be familiar with this is one of theinteresting variant that we will be implementing now alright so keep track of the turn who hasto lay next we will have some variable called turn so let me initialise it , let me start the valueof turn with zero so why zero nothing special it is general practice in computer science tocount form zero you can start from anything basically what has to be taken care of is the turnsmust be alternated between the two players so player one gets a chance now the next must goto player two the next chance must go to player one the next must go to player two and thischain must be happening so to take care of that you can start from any value only thing is youhave to take care of the strict alteration that is the both must get the chance equally thatshould not be the case that same person get chance again and again that should not be thecase so that we have to take care of it that s it . so for that we have a variable turn it s just ageneral practice of computer science to start counting form zero that why i have initialisedzero nothing special you can start from any value , so let me say the players are willing tocontinue the game or not willing to continue the game so this could be the two states as theplayers keep playing some may be it is a two player game so we need both the players to playin case if someone is not willing to continue then the game comes to an end so to keep trackof whether they are willing to continue or not so i would say willing i will keep a variablewilling initially will have that to true because this is the start off the game so let us keep ittrue and as long as the players are willing you have to play the game so let me say whilewilling while willing so as long as they are willing , as long as both the players are willing youcontinue the game so this is how now here comes the actual game and i say the turn has to bealternated so same here i have started the value of turn with zero you may start with anyparticular value at the value zero it is the turn of player one at the value one it is the turn ofplayer two at the value two it is the turn of player one again at the value three it is the turn ofplayer two again and this is how it goes as you would observed if the turn value is zero twofour six eight and so on it is a turn of player one if it is one three five seven nine and so on itis the turn of player two so every even value of turn is the turn of player one and odd value isthe turn of player two , how do we keep track of this ? even and odd values there is anoperator called the modulo operator , what it does is , it divides and returns the reminder ofdivision so to check whether the number is odd or even you would divide the number by twoand check the reminder , for all even numbers dividing by two would give you the reminderzero for all odd numbers dividing by two will give the reminder one so we will use thisconcept and check whether the particular value is odd or even so the turn has to be check if itis odd or even so let me check if turn modulo sorry its turn modulo two is equals to equalequal to zero why did i use double equal to because single equal to is assignment basicallywhatever be the value i don t care just assign this value something like that this is i want tocheck the equality , i want to retain the value and check it with some standard value so for thatsome equality check i will apply use double equal to symbol so if this is equal to zero that iseven value the turn is even value , if it is even then you divide by two you will get thereminder zero so if that happen if turn turned out to be even number then it should be the turnof player one ok let me write that it is the turn of player one ok so we have to first start off bytelling that it is his turn print player ones name you have taken print his name and say that itis your turn player one this is your turn just say him the message alright ? so what should webe doing now ? we should randomly pick a movie from this list of movies , there is a list ofmovies with us from that list we randomly pick a movie so let me say that it is picked moviepicked movie is nothing but for randomly picking a movie you need there is a built in librarycalled random we need to import it lets import it now import random so this is a built inlibrary that would be used in order to pick something randomly from a given list or from agiven range something like that for random selections this particular library is used so forpicking randomly from the given list we use the function called choice it is define in thisrandom library so i will be calling it as random dot choice within this i need to pass the list asthe argument let me the name of this list is movies so i will pass movies so basically what thisdoes here , from this list movies you pick a random choice and assign that to picked movievariable so you are picking a random movie this is what is done here . now once i havepicked a movie i need to create the question that is basically i need to give blanks that manynumber of blanks so here i will be stimulating blanks as stars so if the movie contain say forexample here in our six letters say dangal is the movie i have picked it contains six letters ineed to represent six blanks here i am representing blanks in stars so i need to represent sixstars so i should create the question in that format this is my picked movie is dangal for that ineed to create a question so i have to create a question here so let me do that let me say , youcreate a question for the picked movie that is picked movie as some six characters in my caseas i have said then six stars must be present and in case if the picked movie for example say itis something like anbe sivam , vikram veda or taare zameen par these movies have spaces inbetween so the spaces may not be encoded by stars , spaces must be retained as spaces just theletters must be encoded as stars so this encoding thing i have to do this thing let me say ihave to create the question so this is what is the task i have to do , create a question and oncethe question is created i need to capture the created question so let me capture it in a variablecalled question so i had created a question alright so i have once the question is created andcaptured i need to print it print this question print the question and till now the answer is notyet said that is the person has not yet said the answer so let me say he has not said the answernot said i will have a variable to keep tracking of whether the person as said the answer or notsaid the answer , so let me say this particular value is true not said is true . alright so as long ashe says the answer now we need to continue here so i will say while not said not said as longas the person as not said the answer continue the game so what should you do ? you shouldask him to guess a character so let me take the input character let me say it as ch , ch be mycharacter or let me say letter that is better intuitive name , so let me say letter letter input ihave to input the character your letter this is the your intuitive message i feel you can modifythis message as you wish that s never an issue the thing is as how the question will be postand the person is ask to guess the whether this particular letter is present in that movie nameor not that is what i am doing your letter please enter your letter this is what i want so i willinputting that so when i have to check if that letter is present or not so let me say if that letteris present is present of that letter in the picked movie , a movie was picked right so we have tocheck whether that letter is present in this picked movie or not so if this is present you have tounlock the blanks wherever the letter was present that part has to be taken care of here , elseit s a simple thing so let me complete that first and lets come back to this part of unlockingelse what should i do print his letter whatever he has print he has guessed is not found , this isthe message to be print , this is simple so let s see till now we input the name of the playersstart with zero points each we have a variable turn to keep track of who has to play now andwe have a variable willing to keep track of whether they want to continue the game or theywant to quit the game so as long as they are willing we have to play the game we first startwith checking the value of turn we first start with checking the value of turn here if that is aneven value then it is the turn of player one else so corresponding else let me write here so thatit is , it is not skipped let me write the corresponding value it is in column nine so i need towrite the corresponding else in column nine it s in column nine ok hence this is the turn ofplayer two ok so once they re both the turns are over what should we be doing is we need toincrement the value of turn that is this person has played now this will be the turn of nextperson so i am increasing the value by one , turn is equal to turn plus one this is how i haveincremented the value of turn so this is the outline of our play method we have meantcompleted it just an outline this is a rough idea of how the game will go maybe you pause forsometime look into the outline understand the flow of the game then proceed with it let sproceed with the missing parts here in the next session of this video thanks for watching tillnow please watch next videos in order to completely understand how this program will workthank you .you would have seen an interesting game in the last video sir has a movie in his mind he justwrites as many number of blanks as there are number of letters in that movie name the personfor playing with sir has to guess what could be the movie he has in his mind , just filling theblanks is difficult see even you would take movie name with five letters say then even for thatyou have a lot of possibilities errors so many movies that could be available with five lettersso it is difficult for the person on the other side to guess what could be the movie he has in hismind so he is given the flexibility the person can say i assume that this particular letter ispresent in the movie name so he can guess one letter at a time so he says whether this letter ispresent or not he asks sir basically whether this particular letter is present or not , smartstrategy will be generally to start with vowels because mostly vowels will be present in anyname so a e i o u with the vowels if you start you can open lot of blanks you can open up andyou can guess the movie name that is the smart strategy generally we use so for example if isay a i want to guess whether a is present in the movie name so in case if a is present theperson who has posted the question will write a in those blanks wherever a was present in thatmovie name in case if it is not present he would say it is not present you come up with thenext guess other letter . so , this way by unravelling each and every possibility of letter you tryto guess the movie name this is how the game goes , alright ? we have just taken few top ratedmovies from imdb that is the internal movie data base so let us have a list of those movieshere first as a part of our programming let us have a list of those movies , movies let me haveit as a list the first we had was anand in the second was drishyam and the third wasnayakan the forth was anbe sivam so go i have taken the fifth is gol maal the sixth one isvikram vedha so it s vikram vedha the seventh one is black friday the eighth is dangalninth is manichithrarhazhu and the tenth one is taare zameen par so may be for each ofusers because we have to switch between caps and small it would be difficult so let me makeeverything in small letters that just for our ease , it actually doesn t matter may be you canhave all caps or anything as you wish its convenient for me if everything is in small so let memake everything in small letters . i have ten movies i have taken top ten from the imdb , youcan take as many movies as you wish or you can include your favourite movie as per yourwish this list completely up to you , you can have as many the ones which ever you wish youcan have it any ways as you want this list is completely up so we have our list of movies nowlet s play we will start our game . so this thing if you would see here it says undefined nameplay so you say i want to play but the computer doesn t know what to be done if you say playso you have to define what is play ? so you are defining def play this is the particular syntaxto define new functionality if that is if i say play this are the tasks that has to be done , you aredefining it . so we will define what has to be the game we will define basically what has to bedone if someone says play . so here let me say i have two players as you have seen in thevideo there were two players and one person was posting the question here that we make itthe computer posting the question the list of movies we have given are already the list ofmovies from this list the computer is posting the question so just that is the change here andwe will assume the there are two players to play the game so this is the two players gamebasically so we will have player one name i want to each will be having a name it will begood if you would refer them by their name they will feel a personalised thing of playing thepersonalised play they could feel if you use their name instead of just calling player oneplayer two x y something like that you just use their own name it would be good so i have toinput his name so i input it to get the input i should give him a suitable message that pleaseenter your name so only then he can understand what do i actually except in this time and hewill give the proper input so i have to give the message input message that is for thisparticular message , read this message and give your input something like that what could igive ? i can give player one please enter sorry enter your name , i have asked his name thesame has to be done for player two as well so let me copy paste it i am sorry i will copy pastethis let me copy and let me paste here , the only change here is it s player two not the playerone again it should be player two and here to we need a different variable that s why there is awarning ps here that is that s the same name there is a warning that you could see here thiswarning appears because there are two things with the same name p one you had used earlierp one name and the same p one name you had used earlier so if i change it may be thisparticular thing will be resolved and now this warning is because it is assigned but it is neverused but this will be used in the upcoming part of the code but that would be taken care ofthat would be fixed this particular warning symbol that is appearing here would be fixed asthe code proceeds . so let us so let us start off with the next part so for both the playersinitially we will have zero points so let me initialise that points for player one is zero pointsfor player two is also zero so i have initialised and if you would see we alternate the turns ofthe players like may be player one gets a chance to guess the movie name the next would goto the next player this would be an interesting variant if you would alternate and see who getsthe highest score probably there are other variants may be familiar with this is one of theinteresting variant that we will be implementing now alright so keep track of the turn who hasto lay next we will have some variable called turn so let me initialise it , let me start the valueof turn with zero so why zero nothing special it is general practice in computer science tocount form zero you can start from anything basically what has to be taken care of is the turnsmust be alternated between the two players so player one gets a chance now the next must goto player two the next chance must go to player one the next must go to player two and thischain must be happening so to take care of that you can start from any value only thing is youhave to take care of the strict alteration that is the both must get the chance equally thatshould not be the case that same person get chance again and again that should not be thecase so that we have to take care of it that s it . so for that we have a variable turn it s just ageneral practice of computer science to start counting form zero that why i have initialisedzero nothing special you can start from any value , so let me say the players are willing tocontinue the game or not willing to continue the game so this could be the two states as theplayers keep playing some may be it is a two player game so we need both the players to playin case if someone is not willing to continue then the game comes to an end so to keep trackof whether they are willing to continue or not so i would say willing i will keep a variablewilling initially will have that to true because this is the start off the game so let us keep ittrue and as long as the players are willing you have to play the game so let me say whilewilling while willing so as long as they are willing , as long as both the players are willing youcontinue the game so this is how now here comes the actual game and i say the turn has to bealternated so same here i have started the value of turn with zero you may start with anyparticular value at the value zero it is the turn of player one at the value one it is the turn ofplayer two at the value two it is the turn of player one again at the value three it is the turn ofplayer two again and this is how it goes as you would observed if the turn value is zero twofour six eight and so on it is a turn of player one if it is one three five seven nine and so on itis the turn of player two so every even value of turn is the turn of player one and odd value isthe turn of player two , how do we keep track of this ? even and odd values there is anoperator called the modulo operator , what it does is , it divides and returns the reminder ofdivision so to check whether the number is odd or even you would divide the number by twoand check the reminder , for all even numbers dividing by two would give you the reminderzero for all odd numbers dividing by two will give the reminder one so we will use thisconcept and check whether the particular value is odd or even so the turn has to be check if itis odd or even so let me check if turn modulo sorry its turn modulo two is equals to equalequal to zero why did i use double equal to because single equal to is assignment basicallywhatever be the value i don t care just assign this value something like that this is i want tocheck the equality , i want to retain the value and check it with some standard value so for thatsome equality check i will apply use double equal to symbol so if this is equal to zero that iseven value the turn is even value , if it is even then you divide by two you will get thereminder zero so if that happen if turn turned out to be even number then it should be the turnof player one ok let me write that it is the turn of player one ok so we have to first start off bytelling that it is his turn print player ones name you have taken print his name and say that itis your turn player one this is your turn just say him the message alright ? so what should webe doing now ? we should randomly pick a movie from this list of movies , there is a list ofmovies with us from that list we randomly pick a movie so let me say that it is picked moviepicked movie is nothing but for randomly picking a movie you need there is a built in librarycalled random we need to import it lets import it now import random so this is a built inlibrary that would be used in order to pick something randomly from a given list or from agiven range something like that for random selections this particular library is used so forpicking randomly from the given list we use the function called choice it is define in thisrandom library so i will be calling it as random dot choice within this i need to pass the list asthe argument let me the name of this list is movies so i will pass movies so basically what thisdoes here , from this list movies you pick a random choice and assign that to picked movievariable so you are picking a random movie this is what is done here . now once i havepicked a movie i need to create the question that is basically i need to give blanks that manynumber of blanks so here i will be stimulating blanks as stars so if the movie contain say forexample here in our six letters say dangal is the movie i have picked it contains six letters ineed to represent six blanks here i am representing blanks in stars so i need to represent sixstars so i should create the question in that format this is my picked movie is dangal for that ineed to create a question so i have to create a question here so let me do that let me say , youcreate a question for the picked movie that is picked movie as some six characters in my caseas i have said then six stars must be present and in case if the picked movie for example say itis something like anbe sivam , vikram veda or taare zameen par these movies have spaces inbetween so the spaces may not be encoded by stars , spaces must be retained as spaces just theletters must be encoded as stars so this encoding thing i have to do this thing let me say ihave to create the question so this is what is the task i have to do , create a question and oncethe question is created i need to capture the created question so let me capture it in a variablecalled question so i had created a question alright so i have once the question is created andcaptured i need to print it print this question print the question and till now the answer is notyet said that is the person has not yet said the answer so let me say he has not said the answernot said i will have a variable to keep tracking of whether the person as said the answer or notsaid the answer , so let me say this particular value is true not said is true . alright so as long ashe says the answer now we need to continue here so i will say while not said not said as longas the person as not said the answer continue the game so what should you do ? you shouldask him to guess a character so let me take the input character let me say it as ch , ch be mycharacter or let me say letter that is better intuitive name , so let me say letter letter input ihave to input the character your letter this is the your intuitive message i feel you can modifythis message as you wish that s never an issue the thing is as how the question will be postand the person is ask to guess the whether this particular letter is present in that movie nameor not that is what i am doing your letter please enter your letter this is what i want so i willinputting that so when i have to check if that letter is present or not so let me say if that letteris present is present of that letter in the picked movie , a movie was picked right so we have tocheck whether that letter is present in this picked movie or not so if this is present you have tounlock the blanks wherever the letter was present that part has to be taken care of here , elseit s a simple thing so let me complete that first and lets come back to this part of unlockingelse what should i do print his letter whatever he has print he has guessed is not found , this isthe message to be print , this is simple so let s see till now we input the name of the playersstart with zero points each we have a variable turn to keep track of who has to play now andwe have a variable willing to keep track of whether they want to continue the game or theywant to quit the game so as long as they are willing we have to play the game we first startwith checking the value of turn we first start with checking the value of turn here if that is aneven value then it is the turn of player one else so corresponding else let me write here so thatit is , it is not skipped let me write the corresponding value it is in column nine so i need towrite the corresponding else in column nine it s in column nine ok hence this is the turn ofplayer two ok so once they re both the turns are over what should we be doing is we need toincrement the value of turn that is this person has played now this will be the turn of nextperson so i am increasing the value by one , turn is equal to turn plus one this is how i haveincremented the value of turn so this is the outline of our play method we have meantcompleted it just an outline this is a rough idea of how the game will go maybe you pause forsometime look into the outline understand the flow of the game then proceed with it let sproceed with the missing parts here in the next session of this video thanks for watching tillnow please watch next videos in order to completely understand how this program will workthank you .alright guys in the previous video we had seen the outline of the game and the flow of thegame how the flow would go this is how the game is played all this we had seen let s give avery quick summary , we had collected a movies from imdb and we had inputted the twoplayers name for personalisation purpose we had started with zero points each we had avariable to keep track of whose turn it is and we had a variable to keep track of whether theyare willing to continue the game or not . and in the persons turn you have to display the thatis his turn , pick a random movie from this list create the question that is encode all charactersexcept by star print the question then as long as he says the answer you repeat this processyou ask him to guess the letter whether it is present in the movie name , if it is present youneed to unlock it else say that letter is not found , for unlocking what is that we are doing is , inthat movie name if that particular letter is present that particular star is replaced by the actualletter and other letters just remains star this is how it happens , it happens repeatedlysometimes because with one character sometimes the person may able to guess the moviename in that case if he wants to guess the movie name , you get his answer check if it is thecorrect movie name , if it is correct display the message it is correct and increase his score byone point and say that this is your score and once he has said that it is correct this particularthing comes to an end , the thing of guessing the letter unlocking the letter these thing comesto an end . in case if he is wrong you have to ask him to try again and in case if he wants tounlock another character and he doesn t want to have a guess , you need to repeat the sameprocess again in this particular subsequent round of unlocking what you have to do is , theletter that is already unlocked must remain unlock only that shouldn t be encoded by starsagain so the thing that are noted know to the person is what encoded as stars so this is howthe game goes and after he has given the answer ask him he wants to continue the game orquit based on that you act accordingly if he wants to quit say that this is the scores and this isthe status till now and give him a good greeting message and say that you want to quit thegame so just say willing is false where the games comes to an end , in case the person wantsto continue what should be done is you should increment the value of turn as you could seehere you could increment the value of turn so that the next player gets the chance to play , thething continue this way you can continue the game on and on as long as not even one of themwants to quit the game , you can play the game on and on so here there are some things thatare undefined you could see this one create question is present and unlock this threefunctionalities are not yet defined so let us define them one by one create question this isfunctionality that is not defined so let me define it so let me say here let me say i have todefine the particular process of creating a question so let me say define this is the way youcreate a new function , this is creating a question is a function you want to be created so wewill create this question based on a given movie there movie will be given here so based on amovie . you need to create a question alright so how do we do this ? first let me capture thelength of the movies let me say n let the movie contain n characters this included spaces aswell please note that this length include spaces as well so for example if you would take thisthing if you would take golmaal movie there is three characters under space and fourcharacter so it will be counted as eight characters so it is golmaal has three characters spaceand four characters so it will be counted as eight characters so this is how the length of themovie will be counted so i need to calculate the length for this we have a pre defined functionlength , length of the movie that has been fast raved that is for which movie you want to createa question get its length and for encoding we need to process the individual characters if it isa space you should remain you should keep it as a space only otherwise you should make it astar so we have to process has individual characters so to get individual characters what youdo is maybe you can say may be i will say letters , let me say the letters is the list i amcreating out of this movie name list of movie , movie is a string that is this as a single wordwill be passed so that would be decomposed into individual letters by this functionality listso that letters would be a list . we will have now also create a new temporary list may be iwill call it as temp that will be used later we will come to know what is the purpose why weare creating this new list because we need to output the encoded format so the encodedformat based on individual character i will have it has a list and then i will join it to a singlestring that is how i am going to do it so let me do that , so we have to hydrate over that is wewill move over every character every letter of the movie name so that is present every letter ispresent in this list letters so i have to move over this for i let me have a variable most over iin the range of how many letters are there ? that is captured by this value n which shows thelength which calculated the length range of n ok right ? if what we should check , if that isspace i should just keep it as a space otherwise i should make it a star so let me say that isfound in letters if letters at this position i is equal to space then to this temporary array to theoutput array i have to append that is i have to add at the end , end of the current list i have toadd a space else if it is not a space i have to add a , add the same character , i have to add thecharacter star so every letter is encoded by star except this face that is taken care of here if itis a space you append a space else you append a star that s what you have done now yourtemporary array contains the encoded form of your temporary list contains the encoded formof your movie which is nothing but your question you call that as your question so you needto return it but your question is a single word not a list so you need to make it a single wordfor that we have a built in functionality called join , so let s make use of it and we will join itso let me call it as may be let me say it is a question is nothing but irrespective of anycharacter just keep joining , just keep joining every letter you convert the letter into a stringformat because string format it is easier you to join so you are converting into string formatfor every letter x in the temp , so how this works , let me once again say this temp is the arraywhich has , temp is the list which has the stars and spaces with respect to the chosen moviename so say for example if our movie name is golmaal then with respect to g the star isappended then with respect to o the star is appended with respected to l the star is appendedhere is a space so space is appended then star , star , star , star this is how you have encoded andyou have it has a individual character for each of the individual character you convert it to astring and keep joining into one composite string that is as one question so this i don t want itas a list of eight characters but , i want it as one string of eight characters that is how one wordof eight characters something like that i want , so that is what i am doing by this join functionso i have created this question so let me return the question that s it create question no words ,if you would see here then you would say create question what you do is you calculate thelength of the movie you convert it into individual characters the list of individual charactersbecause based on the characters you have to append that is if it is a space you just keep it as aspace that s what is taken care of here if it is a space then keep it as the space itself else youhave to put a star and then now from the list you merge back and get back the original string ,get back as a string that is a question so you get back the question you return that questionthat is instead of having a list of some characters you merge those single individual charactersand make it as a single string and return that single string that is what we are doing here withthe help of the join functionality all these are pre defined functionalities alright so createquestion part is over so sorry this is picked movie sorry for this picked movie , its pickedmovie given that i have copied pasted even here i am sorry this is picked movie not pickalright ok so now the warning occur at is present define name is present and undefined nameunlocked so we will define them slowly so let us define that , define so let me a singlefunctionality is not define is present is present so what are the characters what are the things ihave passed one letter and a movie so i have to see if this particular letter is present in themovie name so this is what i have to check in this functionality so let me say i will have acounter , so for this what do i do is my logic is i will count the number of occurrences of theletter and this movie there is a functionality pre defined functionality for strings to count thenumber of occurrences of characters say for example my name vidya , if i want to count thenumber of occurrences of letter a in vidya i have a functionality if i pass vidya and a to it iwould get back one as the answer because letter a occurs once in string vidya in case if iwould give the input as t , letter t is not present in vidya so it would output zero so it wouldreturn back the answer as zero because this occurrence of t , that is letter t occurs zero times inthe word vidya where as the letter a occurs one time in the word vidya , if it occurs multipletime may be if you could take some may be you take from the same movie itself say dangalletter a occurs two time so it will return two so if the letter is present it will return non zerovalue that is some positive value if it is not present that function will return a zero value , ifthe value is zero then the letter is not present that is the logic we are going to use say we aremaking use of the pre defined functionality of strings ok so i need to get the count so let meget the count so let us say c for count equals to movie dot count that s it this is thefunctionality count of letter so this particular functionality will count how many times thisletter occurs in that movie name so it will count if this value of c is equal to zero that meansthat letter is not present so is present this what you are asking if the if that is present so giventhat it is zero it means it is not present so you have to return false return false sorry false elsewhat should be the case ? it should return true i guess this is quite intuitive only thing that weare using is this is the pre defined functionality count that counts the number of occurrencesof the particular letter in the movie so if the movie doesn t contain that letter then it willreturn zero which will say that false for which we are returning false that is this letter is notpresent in that movie name or else we will say it is present so is present functionality hasbeen find so if we could see the warnings are disappear the warnings are disappeared so hereonly warning that is still there is unlocked so we need to define this , let us do it or maybe youcan pause here for some time just see to the flow once , once again and now we have definedthis two new functionalities you would , you may even see to the flow and pause it in thatparticular point where this functionality is being called you trace what is happening howthings were done just trace it for clear and understanding so maybe , i would recommend youguys pause here understand the flow completely and then proceed , now comes the unlockingpart we will do it so before going to the unlocking part please do make sure that you haveunderstood the flow till here . alright i hope you guys have paused and understood the flowtill here let us get with unlocking part define unlock ? for unlocking what are all the things iam having the modified question let me call it question itself here it doesn t matter and thenyou have a movie name that is the picked movie name you have passed that you have passedthen the particular letter alright oh here it is letter than i am sorry for this , this is letterbecause we are not using the term character , character is the technical term that generallybeing used in the computer science for letter , letter is a intuitive term for anyone who knowsenglish , so its better if we use letter itself so here also its letter sorry for this confusion ok sofar so good , so we have requesting that is the status till now that is how many letters havebeen unlocked or nothing has been unlocked all letters will be encoded as stars and spaceswill remain as spaces if something as been opened then that particular letter will be visibleothers will be encoded as star and the spaces will remain as spaces so the movie will containthe actual movie name and the letter which the person wants to unlock that is this will in thiscase note that it will never happen that letter is not present because here itself we are makinga change if the letter is present only then we are getting into the uncloaking part if it is notpresent we just say that it is not present so here that particular thing you need not worry aboutwhat if the letter is not present what will i unlock if you need not worry about it the letter willbe definitely present . ok so i need to process character wise so similar to how we did createquestion part we will break the string into list of characters that is what we will be doing now ,we are going to refer to this movie so let me call it as reference , reference list , list of movieok then i want the question list as well so let me call it as question list or may be ql for shortanything but it s not a problem we can have that is question list , the question list is the list ofthe question , question is nothing but the status till now how many characters are under hasbeen known to the player and how much has been not untracked so this is the questionbasically here and same like that for output say we will have a temporary list , if you couldunderstand the create question part well this would be easier for you so that s why i hadrecommended that you guys please do pause and take a look at it in case you feel again youneed to take a look at it it s never a problem you can pause here take a look at it youunderstand that really well then now proceed here alright so , i believe you guys are now veryclear with all the parts , so let s proceed similarly , i would find the number of characters in themovie that is determine using the pre defined functionality like number of characters in themovie . so let me iterate in the similar way for i in range of n so for each of that what should ido , if the particular character in this reference list is the actual letter or if it is a space youhave to append the space only else you have to append the stars or the characters that isalready there as per the scenario so let us do it . let us first have it if letter in the movie actualmovie name if the letter is equal to sorry space or if that letter is equal to the letter that youhad asked what should you do ? you should append the actual letter to the output you shouldadd the actual letter to the output . why do we do that ? if it is a space or if it is desired letterin that particular position see for example may be anand is the movie that is been picked anda is the letter they are seeking for at the first position the letter is a which is the desired letterso in that case i should reference that list i should move to that list and take that particularcharacter and append it to my output , so my output are also showing , a is the letter by playeris seeking to unlock an a is present in that position so a has to be appended in the output . elseif it is none of them else what should i do ? i should check whether this particular question listhas star in it in this position or it is not star that mean say for example the same movie anandin the first iteration probably the person has unlocked a and he wants to unlock d now let usjust assume he wants to unlock d so what is the thing that noticed , so our letter now we wantto unlock is d and the question is a star a star , star and movie is anand this is what is pass tous so the reference list will contain anand in single characters a list of single characters thequestion will still contain a star a star , star as a list of characters and this is our output list andwe have taken the length and it is this reference list at this position is not a space also it is notequal to our letter d so it will come to the else part so you have to check so he wants tounravel d it shouldn t be the case that you should give him star , star , star , star d you shouldgive him a star a star , that should be the output right so you have to check whether thequestion list has star or some other character that is that character might have been unravelduring the previous runs so you have to check it so let me check it if the question list at thatparticular position contains star , if that is containing star then you append star then youappend a star else what you do ? sorry it s a spelling mistake append ok and here it is else youappend the actual character sorry , sorry it s again a spelling mistake append the actualcharacter where is the actual character present ? it is present actually in both the places in thisreference list as well as the question list because during the previous run of unravelling alsoyou would have referred to the reference list and unravel so you can use any of the twoquestion list of i or reference list of i that is ith position of question list or the reference listyou can use any of them . let me use reference list , reference list of i so i have appended it okso in a similar fashion so now given that i have iterated in this would be done for all thecharacters all the letter of the movie given that we have completed now we have we wouldhave got the output list as a list of characters we want it as a single string so similar to ourprevious operation we would do a join functionality so let me say this is my let me say this iwill copy , this is what i am basically precisely doing this way i am copying and pasting it soquestion is already given so let us say this as question new just for clarity sake i am sayingthis is question new , new question we got and now return the new question so whatever wehave done is almost very much similar to what is done in the create question part so if youcould understand that there you can definitely understand it what you need to take care is if itis space or if it is required character then you append the required character else you see if itis star that is it has been not unravelled the previous run then you append a star else youappend a actual character here you could use reference of i or question list of i as wellanything can be used because during the previous runs of unravelling as well you would havereferred to the reference list and you would have followed the same procedure so it doesn tmatter both will actually be the same value you could use any value and then now we arejoining the output list into a single string and we are returning that string this is howunlocking works alright ? now may be you can pause and have a look at the entire code howthings go on , how everything works , you just have a look at it , let s run this in the next video .alright , in the previous video we have seen the various parts of the code we had seen the playmethod and the various other sub methods it is using so let us just have a very quick recap ofit , we had collected the list of movies from the imdb site we had inputted the two playersname and we had started off with zero points each , we had different variables like turn andwilling as the name suggest it make sure that turn is alternated the game goes when both arewilling to play even if one person is not willing to play game comes to an end and to alternatethe turns we are making use of this mode operator and during each turn of the person youneed to randomly you pick a movie and create a question how question works here , if youcould see create question what it does is it splits it to the individual characters it sees if theindividual letters it sees if the letters is a space you just keep it as a space some other letterother than space you encode it as star . so this is how question has been created and oncequestion has been created question is displayed to hum and the player is asked to asked toguess the character guess a letter guess a letter that is present in the movie name so he has toguess the letter , once he has given the letter once you first check the letter is present in themovie name or not so to check if it is present in the movie name we are making use of a builtin functionality count that will say how many times this letter has occurred in the particularword so movie is our word in that movie how many times this letter has occurred , if it has notat all occurred it will return zero otherwise it will return a non zero positive value so if it isretuning a zero you say it is false that is it is not present is present while we are playing isfalse otherwise it is true so that s how we are returning the false and true valuescorrespondingly and if it is not present you say that this letter is not found if it is present youhave to unlock the unlock the letters , so for unlocking what do you do ? you do somethingvery similar to that what we are done in create question we open the sting into list of lettersyou open the string in the list of characters and based on the each character if it is a space orthat actual letter which he has wanted to unlock you append that letter into the output stringotherwise if it is not unlocked yet so and this is not that letter as well then you have to appendstar else you have to append letter that has been unlocked till now this is how we have createdthe output list now we merge the individual characters of the output list into a single stringand return that single string so this is how unlocking has been done once unlocking has beendone you print the unlock version and based on that the user can take two decisions either hecan guess the name of the movie or he can unlock another character if he wants to unlockanother character the same process is repeated if he wants to guess the movie name you askhim to answer check if it is correct , if it is correct say that he has said the correct answer andincrease his points by one and show him his points and once he has said the correct answerthis particular thing of asking for a character unlocking guessing all this come to an end sothis is how the movie goes sorry this is how the game goes and this once he had said theanswer what should you do is , you should ask him if he wants to continue the game or not ifhe wants to continue let him play that is then the value of then the if you say he wants tocontinue then the value of turn is increased by one in order to fascinated the next player toplay the game in case he wants to quit then the game totally comes to an end before endingthe game you show the status greet them well and then you end the game this is how the playgoes ok before starting it running of the code i would like to just say something here if youwould see i have typed as with hint these are all some machine independencies may be someoperating system independencies in some cases it may happen that you need to type it as or insome system linux based system i have used you need to use the function raw input forstring and input for the other data types these are some few decencies you can always allways look it up to what is the problem online and you can fix it please say someindependencies on mac os so i had rectified them this is very trivial just i am type it as stringit into if some of you have already familiar with java or heard of java even java works likethis takes all input by default as string so we need to convert it into the type whatever weneed here we know that the input is either one two something like that its a number so i amtypecasting it as a loop so this is just a few independencies so for a mac this is notindependencies for mac os for linux os one independencies i observed was it takes twofunctions raw input and input so you can look it up depends on may be for windows theremay be some independencies you can always look it up in case if something doesn t workyou can always look it up , you can see as to what is an solution , you have lot of solutionavailable online on stack overflow there are many such sites where people generally posttheir problems and there are many who help with solutions to all these this purely managedby people it s amazing you get good response there and if you know some answers if youcontribute that is different feeling that is different kind of feeling proud feeling you would geti would recommend that you guys be a part of such community where you can interact withyour fellow programmers and you gain more knowledge as you would generally would haveheard pier knowledge is something that is uncomparable to other types of knowledge , even inyour college the study time college or school events you could remember you would havedone a group study those memories are something those things are something that as nomatch for it so it is always the case that clear learning has a very good advantages associatedwith it so one such clear learning clear learning thing for programming is this thing stackoverflow or such online platforms you can always look up to it may be you can try readingthrough solutions already presenting can gain more knowledge and you can also contribute ifyou know something there is website for almost everything for hose not from computerscience background as well stack exchange has got lot of websites you can see to it may beyou would have seen through it already if not also please be a part of such community sowhere you actively discuss about the current happenings of your field and you stay updatedwith it so this is i am just telling this so that you guys can be a part of this amazingcommunity where you stay updated with what happenings in your field that s it this thing ihad just looked up and i had included it nothing now let s run the program . ok player oneplease enter your name ok if he enter let me say abc player two please enter your name let mesay xyz ok some characters are there one two three four five six seven eight , eight characterswithout any spaces so i am not able to guess what is the movie so let me play smartly , it isgenerally a practice that they you usually unlock vowels you try with all vowels then why thisis generally a practice in almost any movie name you see you would have this letteroccurrences almost all the time almost all the time so this is general a practice so i will startwith a so a is present only once so this is unlocked ok and maybe , i want to unlock anothercharacter i would unlock e , e is not found ok let me unlock i , yeah i is found let me unlockanother character o , o is not found u , u is not found y not found , yeah i guess now i know themovie name let me guess it drishyam correct ? we will see your score one which says no iwant to continue or quit let me continue alright oh this is the problem we had to make thesmall rectification then everything will work good , let us do it very quickly see i have notchange the name here its p two its player twos turn i had copy pasted i had missed changingthe name so let us do it very quickly so this is how it happens actually you run and by thensomething unexpected comes then you come to know that oh i skipped it , this is how theprogramming happens so in case you are making mistakes please never get disheartened allthese is learning process failures are the stepping stones for success they say this is verymuch true in case of programming through lot of mistakes only you come to know what everis the correct way t two i have to change here and yeah somewhere else yeah here i have tochange same lines so ok somewhere else i have to change , do i have to change anywhere elseno i guess yeah fine alright let me save let me open a new console letter let me open freshconsole and let me run it run ok player one abc player two xyz your turn someone two threefour five six seven eight , eight characters let me guess a i am lucky that i am probably gettingthe same movie let me unlock another i get i yeah i got the same movie let me guess now itsdrishyam correct ? so let me continue xyz your turn one two three four five six seven eight allthis is probable actually because we are randomly picking a movie that s it so it may be thecase that both the players get the same thing this is highly lesser the probability but if youwant to make it still the least , you want to decrease the probability that both the people get thesame movie name you increase the number of movies in the list that is what just here we haveten movies because we were not interested in scrolling through the imdb list our aim here isto learn the programming part and not to watch movies so i just had to pick some ten moviesfrom imdb maybe if you would pick more movies there were two fifty movies they weredisplayed there if you would pick some hundred movies two hundred movies this probabilitythat the both people get the same thing is very rare so maybe i hope next time i will get someother movie yeah i am getting some other movie so let me say with my letter a these are thethings so let me unlock another letter e yeah now i am i guess now i am able to guess themovie see with vowels you are able to guess the movie very quickly taare zameen par sowontedly let me say without spaces i want to check if it will works fine wrong answer ! seethis not excepting the movie name contains spaces so you have to give spaces it doesn texcept the other way perfect ! so i have to again say some letter so let me say r even that iknow that this is the movie name say r ok so it is unlocked so i have to guess the moviename this time properly with spaces i will give taare zameen par ok yeah abc your score istwo and i want to continue xyz one two three four five six seven eight oh this xyz must bevery lucky person he is getting the same thing this is this occurs because we have a very lessnumber of movies , if you increase the number of movies in the list you will get a betterrandom a better choices every time yeah fine continue again i am getting the same wow ok ohits some different movie alright see i was saying the same movie again and again and i wasthinking this is same movie no this is different movie so i am i don t know the answer whatwould i do ? ok let me give my same answer it will anyways it s a wrong answer let s seeyeah i have to try again with some other letter ok a e i o u y alright now i know the movienow let me write nayakan sorry i should say that i want to guess the movie then i will so oki will write nayakan perfect ! now , i want to quit let me press zero see i am greeted , abcyour scores is this , xyz your score is this and i am greeted alright this is how the programoutput had appeared and this is how the game was played , you would have seen in that andduring the run off the game one thing you would have noticed this sometimes one movie gotrepeated often some movie may get repeated often this is usually a case even when we playmanually right ? see suppose assume that you are playing same game for some one hour twohour something like that then sometimes it may happen that you forget that you had allalready set the movie name you already asked that as a question and you may pose the samequestion again it happens , the same thing happens with the computer as well , computer howdoes it does ? it has a list of movies it picks a movie name randomly it s purely a probabilityso we can never guarantee that you will never get a repetition that is in case for example saythe movie dangal if it has been picked i never give you a guarantee that again dangal willnever be free so that we can never guarantee in this randomly picking method because for thisrepetition to occur the probability associated the math behind it and the probability is not zeroprobability it is not a zero probability there is some minimal probability with which thisrepetition can occur , it is evidently visible because we have only ten movies in our list , incase if you increase the number of movies if you have some hundred movies in the list thisprobability of repetition is very , very less and you it is not very evident that there is arepetition but there will be repetition the probability of it is non zero so that there may berepetitions may occur there , you can never guarantee that repetitions would never occur somay be for that you can think of some strategies can you think of some other way other thanrandomly picking from a list can you pick the movies such that repetitions will never occurcan you pick the movie from the list from some other method you can brain storm with lot ofvarious methods as well , as well as to implement this , this is not the only way there are manyways by which you can implement the same thing you can come up with the variants in theimplementation we have done you can probably make this particular thing we had copypasted for player one and player two right you can make this particular thing as a sub functionand you just make it as a single function or instead of making this many lines so that is youryou making this as a single function and reusing the same function when needed you can dothat , that is one of the improvisation you can do with this implementation and as good as a lotcan be done , this is not the one standard way there are many ways also for the game there aremany standard variants may be you can have some constraints like maximum ten guesses , ifallowed more than you can not you can not allow the person to guess something like that , youcan have constraints and may be you can vary the points based on in which guess he gets hisright you can vary the points in , you can do anything per imagination sky is the limit you cando a lot of variants you can go on and on you can you can come up with many differentimplementations you would you would you can even create some brand new game with thisas well with the different variants set up as i had said with different incentives schemes withdifferent points and you can have a any number of any type of game you can create with this .so i would recommend that you guys do give some thoughts over it come up with your ownvariants do discuss that in the discussion form and as i had said in this video itself clearlearning is something that is that has no match , so i would recommend that you guys pleasediscuss in the discussion form and faster clear learning you also enrich your knowledge aswell so thanks for watching the video till now please do take part in the discussion formplease discuss your variants your different strategies of implementation or any idea regardingthis you have got you can please do discuss that in the discussion form thanks for watchingtill now have a nice day .hello guys , welcome to yet another programming screen cast , in this programming screencast we are going to see of data structure called as the dictionaries . i hope you are familiarwith the term data structures because in your precious weeks you have been introduced todata structure called list . this week we will see a data structure called dictionary . sodictionary as the word says it is similar to the english dictionary or any language dictionaryfor that matter . how is the data stored in the dictionary ? you have words and meaningscorresponding to it so there are two items in this dictionary words and the meaning somethinglike that even in python dictionaries you have two elements and the relationship between thetwo is what is model by this data structure called dictionary , technical terminology is key andthe value is what they say it is key and the value is what they say , key is nothing but theunique identifier for a given value for example this is the common example which peoplegenerally say there may be multiple people sharing a same name in a college in that case toidentify a student uniquely the college may assign some id number something like that thereis unique id associated with an item that is called as key and the value is nothing but the otherdetails of the item for example assume there are more people by the name amit so if there aremultiple persons with name amit they may assign some id number and they may store theperson s name . so that the id number would uniquely identify which person is being referredto as something like that , in such applications this dictionary data structure is highly useful ,so we will take some other example this student id and the student details is something withgenerally people say so let us take some other example in this screen cast , i will take thecurrency conversion concept so here our keys that is our unique things will be our name ofthe currency and the value will be the conversion factor so i will take indian rupees as thebase so i will take the different currencies dollar euro yen whatever you say i will , dollar isthe key and value is nothing but one dollar equals how many indian rupees ? that will be myvalue this is what i am going to take in this screen cast . so dictionary as you could see is adata structure that models this kind of relationship that there is a unique identifier and valueassociated with it . so two , two elements relationship what is captured here ok let us see howshall we create a dictionary . very simple , how did you created a list ? you said l equal to thiskind of brackets right ? this will create a list something like that for creating a dictionary youhave to give the name of the dictionary conversion factor let me name the name that itselfconversion factor this is a dictionary see this is the curly braces as you could see her , theseare the curly braces , curly braces denotes the dictionary , so if say this and press enter a emptydictionary gets created so if i say conversion factor and press enter see an empty dictionary iswhat is shown as the output , so now what should i do ? i should start adding the values that isi should adding the conversion factor for various currency systems , as i said i will be takingthe indian rupees as the standard one to which we want to convert , so that is from thisparticular currency system we dollar or euro or yen whatever be there from there we want toconvert it to the indian rupees that s what we want to do here , i want to add the value ofdollar please note that these are just approximate value i want to add the value dollar so howshould i do that ? here goes the syntax please observe , conversion factor this is the name ofthe dictionary and i need to use the same brackets that i used in list , here is should give thevalue of my unique key here the value of my unique key is i will say dollar , dollar is myunique key and equal to what is the corresponding value , i assume that it is sixty rupees , onedollar is equal to sixty rupees this is just my assumption so i give the name of the dictionaryas you could see here i gave the name of the dictionary this brackets this square bracketswithin the square brackets i gave my key that is the unique identifier and equal to thecorresponding value this is the syntax of how you have to add a new item , so new item gotadded how would we know ? let us just display the conversion factor see a new item gotadded dollar colon sixty so dollar is the key corresponding value is sixty it got added , if iwant to add further more item i can add it let me do that , euro equals let me say eighty this isjust an approximate see i print it now see you got it , dollar colon sixty , euro colon eightyanother item got added up so this is how dictionary is worked you have a key which uniquelyidentifies your value and the associated thing is called as a value . now let us see how can weview the dictionary ? so this is in console i am doing it , but when you do it do it in yourprogramme you generally use the print command just like how you gave print the listsomething like that you can give here as well print conversion factor which is the name of ourdictionary , you can give this see this got printed dollar and then euro and now let us see howcan we access the individual items . so i want to know that is the value of euro , how would ido that ? i would say conversion factor of the key is euro that is i want to know the valuecorresponding to euro , see eighty is shown as the output that is corresponding to euro thevalue stored is eighty so this is how you access this specific value , you retrieve the specificvalue now if you want to list out all the keys present in your dictionary , you need to sayconversion factor which is the name of our dictionary dot keys this is the functionality if i putthis see i got the list of all keys that has been enhanced into some special data structure so ifyou wanted to be there in the list i need to convert it into list , you could see here if iconverted into a list i got the output as a list this list the all keys that are present in yourdictionary if you want to list the values that is the associated item you want to list it , it issimple instead of keys you put values and as you could see here the values are listedcorresponding values are listed in case you want to fetch both keys and values simultaneouslythat is what are all the items that is present in the dictionary is what you want to see , thedictionary name here it is conversion factor dot items it will list the items in the dictionary seeit says dollar comma sixty euro comma this whole thing what you call as tupple that isomething but something which is constant as dollars and sixty are associated ones youcan not separate it something like that also if you want to know what are all the functionalitythat is available conversion factor dot and press the tab that is you get the all functionalitywhatever is available from this whatever is the item you want to know you can type that forexample let me say pop is the functionality i want to know , i want to know what thisfunctionality does ? you just put a question mark at the end so it gives the documentationcorresponding to it so it says it will remove the specified key and return the correspondingvalue the key is not found it will raise an error for example here dollar and euro is there nowif i say conversion factor of yen i know that there is no such key but still let me show you seeit has raised what is called the key error states that this particular key is not present in yourdictionary so the key error would be raised in case if the key what you ask is not presentotherwise it will remove the key and return you the value associated with it , there are lot offunctionalities available as i had said using the tab key you can get to know of all thosefunctionalities , now we shall see updating , this for example i had written dollar is sixty andeuro is eighty and i suddenly came to know that the value of dollar has been changed so iwant to update it , how would i do that ? please observe it is very similar to insert the thing onyour key conversion factor of dollar is equal to the new value , let me say not sixty its sixtyfive let me say sixty five and enter now let me list the dictionary see it got updated it wassixty initially it got updated to sixty five so this particular statement is same for create as wellas update , if such a key is present already it will update the old value and write the new valueif it is not present it will insert a new value that is what this statement does . this is the samesyntax for both create as well as update so how shall we delete a specific key from thedictionary so let me add one more element conversion factor of yen , this is just myapproximation i assume that it is fifty rupees this is my assumption ok so let me enter so nowlet me check what is in my dictionary so my dictionary contains dollar euro yen now i wantto delete specific some values see for example yen is something i had inserted but then irealise that i don t need it so i want to delete it so how would i do it ? observe the syntax d e lis the key word for delete del space name of the dictionary name of the dictionary and insidethat you need to give the key so it would search for the value corresponding to the key anddelete that key value back this what this functionality would do , key would have got deletednow let me display see it was deleted see if the initial stage when we print it we had yen i haddeleted it so if you would see in this updated dictionary there is no specific valuecorresponding to yen in case i give some key which is not in the dictionary it would throw akey error as you had seen earlier so this is how you handle with dictionary as i had said let usdo a small currency conversion so i want the value in rupees , this is thirty euros i want thevalue in rupees it is nothing but the value of euros currently e into whatever is the conversionfactor conversion factor corresponding to euros is what i wanted now check the value of r it stwo thousand four hundred so thirty euros is nothing but two thousand four hundred so insuch situations you see a data structure like dictionary is very handy , i would recommend thatguys use this tab key and explore whole lot of functions that are available in dictionary keepexploring keep learning happy leaning thank for watching this screen cast have a nice day .we have come to the last lecture of this course . so , instead of going into more features of python ofwhich there are many that we have not described . let us take some time instead to reflect aboutpython as a language and compare it to some of the other languages which exist . though you maynot be familiar with them , i would like to highlight some aspects of python which are different fromother languages and also argue whether they are better or worst . why did we choose python to dothis course ? well , python is a very good language to start programming for many reasons . onereason is that it s syntax is very simple and part of the simplicity comes from the fact that you do nothave to declare names in advance , so you do not have to start doing a lot of things before you writeyour code . you can jump into the python interpreter for example , and keep writing statementswithout worrying about what x is and what y is , as you go along you can define values andmanipulate them . so , that makes it very convenient and very nice to start programming because youdo not have to learn a lot of things in order to write even basic programs . the way in which pythonprograms are laid out with indentation to indicate when a loop begins and when an 'if ' block begins .we do not have to worry about a lot of punctuation braces , brackets , semicolons , which are partand parcel of more conventional languages . once again this makes a language little easier to learnand a little less formidable for a new comer to look at . the other thing which is little more technicalwhich we will ... i will talk about a little bit in this lecture is that we do not have to worry aboutstorage beyond understanding what is mutable and immutable . if you need to use a name x , we useit if we need a list l we use it , if we need to add something to an l , we just say append . we neverbother about where the space is coming from or where it is going . these are all plus points ofpython . so , what are the minus points ? so are there things that are bad about python ? the first thingis to do with the lack of declarations the lack of declarations is often a very good thing , because youdo not have to worry about writing a lot of stuff before you start programming , but it is also a badthing because many programming errors come from simple typing mistakes . very often you need towrite x and you write y. now in python if you write a y and you assign it a value somewhere whereyou meant an x , python will not know that you were supposed to use x and not y because every newname that comes along is just happily added to the family of names which your programmanipulates . these kind of typos can be very very hard to find , and because you have this kind ofdynamic name introduction with no declarations , python makes it very difficult for you as aprogrammer to spot these errors . on the other hand if you declare these names in advance whichhappens in other languages like c or c or java . then if you use a name which you have notdeclared then the compiler will tell you that this name has not been seen before and thereforesomething is wrong . so , a miss typed name can be easily caught as an undeclared name if you havedeclarations . whereas , in python it will just happily go ahead and create a new value for that nameand pretend that there are two names now while you think there is only one and create all sorts ofunpredictable errors in your later code . the other side of this is typ ing . so , in python we have seenthat names do not have types they only inherit the type from the value that they have . you could sayat some point x equal to and later on assign x to a string and later on assign x to a list and pythonwill not complain , at each point given the current value of x legal operations are defined as per thatvalue . now this is again nice and convenient but it can also lead to errors for the same reason youmight be thinking of x as an integer , but somewhere halfway through your program you forgot that itis an integer and start assigning it some different type of value . now if you had announced to pythonthat x must always be an integer then this name must only store an integer value , presumably as acompiler it would catch it internally . a lot of errors are either typos in variable names or misguidedusage of names from one type to another , both of these can be caught very easily by compilers if youhave declarations of names , both of these get uncaught or they are left uncaught by python and theyallow you to propagate errors and these errors can be very difficult to find . so the down side ofhaving this flexibility about adding names and changing their types , values as you go along is thatdebugging large programs requires a lot more care on your part , writing large programs requirescare , debugging is very difficult . the other part has to do with the discussion that we had towardsthe second half of the course about user defined data types in terms of classes and objects . so , thefirst thing that is a direct consequence of not having declarations is that we can not assert that aname has a type . in particular we saw that if we want to use something as a list we have to firstdeclare it to be an empty list , so we have to write something like l is equal to this to say that henceforth i can append to it . the first append or the first operation on the list that i do will have to belegal , for that i have to tell it that it is a list . this is more or less like a declaration except it is not quitea declaration . i am actually creating an empty object of that type . in the same way if i want adictionary i have to give it a completely new name like this . i have to say d is equal to an emptydictionary . so , there is no way to assign a type to a name without creating an object of that type . thisis actually a problem with the kind of user defined types that we have , for instance it is veryconvenient to be able to define an empty tree without having to create a tree , a node . for instance ,if you had type declarations you can say that the name t is of type tree and then you can use thisvalue like none all programming languages have such a value which denotes something that doesnot exist . you can say that there is not one none , but many nones and by context this none is a noneof type tree . python also uses it . there is only one value none and you can use none for anything , butwhen it has none , it has no type that is the difference . if in python a name has the value none , ithas by definition no type , whereas if you had declarations you can say that this name has a type , itjust does not happen to have a value . and this is typically what you want for an empty node or anempty tree . we had if you remember a very cumbersome way of dealing with this in order to makerecursive tree exploration work better , we actually added a layer of empty nodes at the frontier andextended our tree by one layer just so that we could easily detect when we reach the end of a path .now this can be avoided actually , if you have type declarations , so this is another feature whichmakes actually ... the lack of declaration makes things a little bit more complicated in python whichone doesn t normally come across in beginning programming . the other thing is much more serious .so , this is more to do with convenience and representation of empty objects , but withoutdeclarations you really can not implement the kind of separation of public and private that you wantin an object . remember our goal in an abstract data type was to have a public interface or a set offunctions which are legal for a data type and have a private implementation . for instance , we wouldhave a stack , we might implement as a list , but we would only like pop and push . same way a queuemay be also a list , but we only want the add and remove queue at opposite ends and we do not wantto confuse this with the list operations we do not want things like append and extend to be usedindiscriminately . the other part of it is that we do not want the data itself to be accessible , we do notwant to say that if given a point p , i can use p dot x and p dot y from outside and directly update thevalues . because , this is sensitive to the fact that tomorrow i might change from x dot y ... x and yrepresentation to r and theta , we said that we might have situations where we might prefer torepresent our point using r and theta . now if some programmer started using point in the days whenwe are using x and y and started manipulating p dot x and p dot y directly outside the code . see if itis inside the class code , then as the maintainers of the class we would make sure that wherever weused to use p dot x and p dot y we now use p dot r and p dot theta . so , it is an internal thing wechange from x , y to r , theta we internally update all the code within the class to be in terms of r , thetaand not x , y. but if somebody outside is using x and y and these values no longer exist then whathappens is that for the outside person their code stops working , because we have changed aninternal implementation of point . and this is a very dangerous situation which happens quite often ,and this is where it is important to separate public from private if they do not have any access to theprivate implementation of the point then they can not use p dot x and p dot y. outside this problem isavoided . so just to reiterate , supposing we have a stack implemented as a list and we only allowpublic methods push and pop , a person who is exploiting this fact that it is a list could directly addsomething to the end and violate the heap property for instance or the stack property . so , we couldget situations where the data structure is compromised because the person is using operationswhich are legal for the private implementation , but illegal for the abstract data type which we aretrying to present to the user . so for this , the only way we can get around this is to actually have someway of saying that these names are private and these names are public . now it is a not that pythondoes not have declarations . if you remember python has this global declaration which allows you totake an immutable value inside a function and say it refers to the same immutable value outside .there are situations in which python allows declarations , but there are many other things where itcould allow declarations and make things more usable , but it does not and this is one example . inlanguages like java or ... you will find a lot of declarations saying private and public , and this looks verybureaucratic but it is really required in order to separate out the implementation from the interface .actually , in an ideal world , the implementation must be completely private . so , you should never beable to look at x and y directly . for instance if you want x there should be a function called get xwhich gives you the x value , there is function called set x which sets the x value . this may looksuperficially the same as saying p dot x equal to v , but the difference is that we do not know actuallythere is an x , x is an abstract concept for us . so , x coordinate is just ... it is a property of the pointwhich we can set . now how we set it is through this function . so , if inside the functions we startsetting r theta as the representation , then changing the x value will correspondingly change r andtheta indirectly . so , when we say get x , for instance , it does not actually read the x value , it gets r costheta and we say set x it will change the r to account for the new x and recompute the theta . in thisway if we have only these functions to access the thing then we have only conceptual values insideand these conceptual values are manipulated through these functions and we do not know theactual representation . so this is the ideal world , everything is hidden and we only have thesefunctions , but this is cumbersome for every part of the data type we have to use these functions .and partly the reason why we have to have this private public declaration is that the programmersare not happy with having to always invoke a function , sometimes they would like to directly assign .they would like some parts of the data type to be public . so , they can say p dot x equal to . but ingeneral this is the style that one would ideally advocate for object oriented programming make allthe internal names and variables private and only allow restricted access , so that they are used in theappropriate way and the use does not get compromised if the internal representation changes . if wemove x , y to r , theta , get x and set x will still work , whereas p dot x may not be meaningful anymore .another reason to have this style of accessing values is sometimes you do not want individual valuesto be actually accessed individually . supposing , we have a date , a date is typically a three componentfield which has the day , month and year . and these have their own ranges the valid days for a monthrange from to and the months range from to , but not every month has days . the validcombination for a day and month depends on both these quantities and in fact it depends on theyear also because we can not have th of february unless it is a leap year . so , if we update day ormonth we have to be careful that we are updating it legally , we can start with the month februarywith the legal date like and then change the date from to , and now end up with an illegaldate which is st of february . so what we need actually is to have a composite update operationwhich sets the date by providing all three values , rather than supplying three separate operations toupdate the three fields separately . even if you have these functions you do not always want to givethese functions individually , because there might be some constraints between the values whichhave to be preserved and you can preserve those by controlling access to them . so you can say , youcan not set the day separately and the month separately , you must set them together . this is how oneother reason why it is good to keep all the implementation private , not allow direct update and thencontrol the way in which you update the values now let us come to storage allocation . how thenames and values we use in our program are actually allocated and stored in memory so that we canlook them up . because in python we use names on the fly we keep coming up with names and thevalues keep changing , python can not decide in advance that it needs a space for x , for one integerbecause tomorrow this x might be a list and it does not even know which names are coming . sopython has to allocate space always in a dynamic manner , it has to keep as you use a name , it has tofind space for it and the space requirement may change if the value changes it s type . on the otherhand if i have a static declaration , then if i say that i is an integer and j is an integer and k is an integerthen the compiler can directly declare in advance some space in the memory to be reserved for i , jand k. now this is particularly useful for arrays , we mentioned that in an earlier lecture , thedifference between arrays and lists . in a statically declared situation , an array of size hundred willactually be allocated as a block of hundred contiguous values without gaps . this means that i can getto any entry in the array by looking at ... the knowing the first value and then how many values toskip . so , if i want the th value , i can go to the first value and calculate where the th value will beif i just jump over that many values and get there directly . this gives us what is called a randomaccess array . it does not take any more time to get to the first element than the last element .whereas in a list , as we saw even in our object based implementation to get to the ith element wehave to start with the head and go to the first , second , third , so it takes time proportional to theposition . if we have static allocation we can also exploit the fact that we can get peculiar randomaccess arrays which python actually does not have . now just because we have declaration does notmean everything is declared statically . even in languages like java and c , we would do this objectoriented style where we would have a template for a class and then we would create object of thisclass dynamically as a tree or list grows and shrinks , we will create more objects or remove them . sothere is a dynamic part also , but it is exclusively for this kind of user defined data types and the staticpart takes care of all the standard data types that you use for counting and various standard thingsand particular arrays very often . if you know in advance , you need a block of data of a particular size ,arrays are much more efficient than lists . one part of storage allocation is getting it , the other part isde allocation , giving it up . so , we saw that in python you can remove an element from the list bysaying del l . in general you can un allocate any name s value by saying del x . so what happenswhen we ... does this give up the storage ? when we say del x we are saying that the space that x iscurrently using for it s value is no longer needed . so what happens to that space ? who takes care ofit ? similarly when we had a list , if you remember , when we wanted to delete a list , if we had asequence of things and we wanted to delete a list , we did not actually delete it , we just bypassed it ,we said that the first element points to the third . now , logically this thing is no longer part of my listbut where has it gone ? has it gone anywhere or is it still there in my memory , blocking space ? sowhat happens with the dead values which we have unset by using del or we have bypassed bymanipulating the links inside an object and so on . so it turns out that languages like python , alsoother languages like java this has nothing to do with declaring variables , it has to do with howspace is allocated . they use something called garbage collection . garbage in the programminglanguage sense is memory which has been allocated once , but it is not being used anymore andtherefore is not useful anymore , because we can not reach it in some sense . so , it is like that listexample there was an element in our list which we could reach from the head . at some point wedeleted it , now we can no longer reach that value nor can we reuse it because it has been declaredto be allocated , so it is garbage . so roughly speaking how does garbage collection work ? well , whatyou do is you imagine that you have your memory and then you have somewhere some names , n , m ,x , l and so on in your program and you know where these things point , this is somewhere here , this issomewhere here , this is somewhere here , this is somewhere here . so , you start with the names thatyou have and you go on ... you mark this thing , you say this is mine , this is mine , this is mine , and thisis mine . now this could be a list , l could be a list , it could be that this in turn points to the nextelement in the list , so it goes here so then you point to this and say this is also mine . it is what thenames point to plus what their pointed values point to , you keep following this until you mark all thememory that you can actually reach from your name , so the names in your program and all thememory that they can indirectly reach . now i can go through and say that everything which has notbeen marked is not in use , so i can go and explicitly free it . this is the second phase . you collect allthe unmarked memory locations and make them free and proceed . now , this is a process which runsin parallel with your program , at some point logically speaking you have to stop your program andmark the memory , release space and then resume your program . so there is an overhead . somelanguages like c do not have this garbage collection built in . so in c if you need dynamic memory , soremember that all the things that you declare in advance are allocated statically , you can not undothem , you can not say hence forth i do not need them . but if you have something like a list or a treewhere you are growing and shrinking , you will ask for a memory , saying , i want memory worth onenode , then you will populate it . when you delete something it is your responsibility as a programmerto say this was given to me sometime back , please take it back . you have to , as a programmer , ask fordynamic memory and more importantly when you are no longer using it , return it back . so , c has thiskind of programmer driven manual memory allocation . this is quite error prone . as you can imaginethere might be just a simple case where a programmer writes a delete operation in a tree or a listand forgets to give the memory back . so , this means that every time something is added andremoved from a list or a tree , in such a program , that thing will be residing in memory leaving it to beused when it is actually not used . so over a period of time this thing will keep filling up . if you takethe flip side and you look at the free memory you think of the free memory as a fluid then the freememory is shrinking . so this is called a memory leak , the memory is leaking out of your system , it isnot really leaking out , it is getting filled out . this is the terminology . so you might see somewhere insome text , the word memory leak . it is just refering to the fact that memory that has been allocatedto a program is not being properly de allocated when it is no longer in use , and the symptom of thiswill be that as the program runs longer and longer , it will start taking up more and more memory andmaking the whole program very much more sluggish . so , the performance will shrink , will suffer overtime as the space shrinks . so , virtually speaking all modern languages use garbage collection becauseit is so much simpler . though there is a runtime overhead with this mark and release kind ofmechanism , the advantages that you get from not having to worry about it and not trusting theprogrammer as such , that you avoid the memory leaks by making sure that your garbage collectionworks rather than relying on the good sense of the programmer to make sure that all the memoryallocated is actually de allocated . for a final point of this last lecture , let us look at a completelydifferent style of programming which is called functional programming . so , python and otherlanguages we have talked about are what are called imperative programming languages . so in animperative programming language you actually give a step by step process to compute things . youassign names to keep track of intermediate values , you put things in lists and then you have tobasically do the mechanical computation we have to simulate it more or less , so a sequence ofinstructions . so you have to know a mechanical process for computing something more or lessbefore you can implement it . functional programming is something which tries to take the kind ofinductive definitions that we have seen directly at heart and just use these as the basis forcomputation . so , you will directly specify inductive functions in a declarative way what to conclude ,so here is a typical declaration . for example , this is a haskell style declaration . so , the first line withthis double colon says that factorial is a function and this is it s type , it takes an integer as input andproduces an integer as output . this is saying that factorial is a box that looks like this . it takes ints andproduces ints , so this is the thing that you have . and then it gives you the rule to compute it . it saysfactorial of is and then the rules are processed in order , so if it comes to the second rule , it meansat this point that n is not . if n is not , then n times factorial n minus is the answer . the actualway that haskell works is by rewriting . we will not get into that , but the main point is that there is nomention here about the intermediate names , it is just taking the parameters passed to the functionand inductive or recursive calls and how to combine them . so here is another example . if you want toadd up the elements in a list , so this haskell 's type for a list of integers , so it takes a list of integersand produces an integer . so , you would say that for a list which is empty , the sum is and againcoming here sum is not ... this is not empty if it comes here because we go in order . if the first listdoes not match , the second list must be not empty , then it has functions such as head or tail to takethe first element or the last element . so , if you have a non empty list , the sum is given by taking thefirst element and then inductively adding it to the inductive result of computing the rest . this is acompletely different style of programming which is called declarative programming and you can lookit up . it is very elegant and it has it s own uses and features . python has actually borrowed some ofit s nice features from functional programming . and one of them in particular that we have seen isthis use of map and filter and in general the idea that you can pass functions to other functions . so ,these are all naturally coming from functional programming and map and filter which allows to takea function and apply to every element of a list . and then resulting from this , very compact way ofwriting lists using list comprehensions in one line , combining map and filter . these are features offunctional programming which are integrated into python . to conclude , one can never say that oneprogramming language is the best programming language , because if there were a best programminglanguage , then obviously everybody would be using that language . the very fact that there are somany programming languages around , it is obvious that no programming language is universallybetter than every other . so what happens is that , you choose a language which is best for you . inparticular here we were trying to learn programming and various aspects of programming datastructures , algorithms . and python being a simple language to start working with and to use and it snice built in things like dictionaries and stuff like that , exception handling , are done in a very niceway , so it makes it very attractive to learn . but as we saw , the same things that make it attractive tolearn , the lack of declarations also limit it s expressiveness . we can not talk about privacy in terms ofimplementations or objects and so on . so the moral of the story is that when you have aprogramming task , you know what you want to do , look around for the language that suites your taskthe best . do not be afraid of learning programming languages to do the task , because once you havelearnt one programming language , it is actually not that much difference between one and the other ,it is just minor differences . of course , there are different styles like functional programming whichlook very different , but more or less if you have a little bit of background , you can switch programsfrom one language to another by just looking up the reference manual and working with it . ofcourse , if you use a programming language long enough , then you should be careful to learn it well ,but for many things you can just get by on the fly by just translating one language to another . so , themain message is that you should focus on learning programming . learning how to translate , first ofall coming up with good algorithms , how to translate algorithms into effective implementations ,what are the good data structures , so your focus should be on algorithms , data structures , the mostelegant way in which you can phrase your instructions . and then worry about the programminglanguage . it is a mistake to sit and learn a programming language nobody learns a programminglanguage , you learn features of a programming language and put them to use as you come up withgood programs . so , with this i wish you all the best and i hope that you have a fruitful career aheadin programming . thank you . if you remember how matrix multiplication works , you have to take tworows , two matrices with compatible entries , and then we compute a new matrix in which for eachentry there , we have to multiply a row here by a column of the same length and add up the values . ifwe have a matrix which is m by n then this must have n times p , so that we have a final answer whichis m times p. in the final entry , we have to make mp entries in the final product matrix and each ofthese entries , require us to compute this sum of these n entries , so that takes us order n time . withtotal work is , usually easy to compute us m times n times p. so , ab i j is this long sum and this sumhas , , up to n entries . computing matrix multiplication for two matrices has a very straightforward algorithm which is a product triple nested loop which takes order m times n times p , if all ofthe dimension are the same this is an order n cubed algorithm . now there are more clever ways ofdoing it , but that is not the purpose of this lecture , but the naive straightforward , way of multiplyingtwo matrices is m times n times p. our interest is when we have a sequence of such multiplicationsto do . supposing , we want to multiply three matrices together a times b times c , then it turns out itdoes not matter whether we first multiply ab and then multiply c or we first multiply a and thenmultiply bc , a times bc , because this is stated as the associative the order in which we group themultiplication does not matter just for normal numbers . if we do times times , it does notmatter whether you do times first , or times first finally , the product is going to be the same .so , the bracketing does not change the answer the final value is the same , but it turns out that it canhave dramatic effects on the complexity of computing the answer . why is this the case . suppose , wehave these matrices a , b and c , and a and b have these columns and rows . a is basically got by, a just has row and columns and b has a rows and column . and c has again rowand columns . these are matrices which look like this . now what happens is that when i multiplyd times c then i get something which is into into . so , we will get an output which is aby matrix , so that has entries , so it is going to take us , steps . now when i multiply aby this i am going to get into into that is another step . if i do a , after i do bc and ido plus , so i do steps . now if i do it the other way , if i take a times b first thenthis whole thing collapses into a by single entry . so , i get into into in steps , i justcollapse this row and this column into a single entry that is like computing one entry in a matrixmultiplication with the resulting thing is exactly that one entry . now i have this one entry , and again ihave to multiply it by this thing and that will take me for each of the columns in this i will get oneentry , so that will take me steps . i take steps to collapse this a into b into a single cell , andanother steps after that to compute that product into c. so instead of steps , i have done itin steps . this is the way in which the sequence of multiplications though multiplication isassociative and it does not matter what you do you will get the same answer the sequence in whichyou do the associative steps can dramatically improve or worsen the amount of time you spenddoing this . in general , we have a sequence m to m n and each of them has some rows andcolumns , and what we are guaranteed is that each adjacent pair can be multiplied . so , r c , r cthe first two are such then c is equal to r , the number of columns in the first matrix is equal to thenumber rows in second matrix , similarly , c is equal to r and so on . these dimensions areguaranteed to match , so the matrix multiplication is always possible . our target is to find out in whatorder we would do it . so , we can at best do two matrices at a time , we only know how to multiply atimes b , we can not take three matrices and directly multiply them . if we have to do three matrices ,we have to do in two steps a times b and then c , or b times c and then a. now same way with nmatrices , we have to do two at a time , but those two at a time could be a complicated thing . i coulddo m then i can combine that and do that combination with or i can do m , m and thendo combination of m multiplied by m and so on . what is the optimal way of computing theproduct , what is the optimal way of putting brackets in other words ? brackets are what tell us , sowhen we say m , m , m , m then one way of computing it just to do this right do m , m , thenm , m . and other way of doing it would be to say do m , m and then do that multiplied by mand then m and so on . so , different ways of bracketing correspond to different evaluation ordersfor this multiplication . and what you want to do is kind of calculate without doing the actualcomputation which is the best sequence and which to do this calculation , so that we optimize theoperations involved . what is the inductive structure ? finally , when we do this remember we only dotwo at a time . at the end , we must end with the multiplication which involves some group multipliedby some group it must look like this , and must have this whole thing collapsing to some m prime ,and this whole thing collapsing to m prime and finally multiplying m prime by m prime . inother words m prime is for some k it is from m all the way up to m k , and m prime is from kplus up to n. so , this is my m prime and this is my m prime , and this k is somewhere betweenand n. in the worst case i could be doing m , and on the other side i can doing it i could have donem up to m n this whole thing . this whole thing is my , the other worst cases i could have done mnot worst , but extreme cases m into m n minus , i might have already computed , and now i wantto finally , multiply it by m n or it could be anywhere in between . if i just pick an arbitrary k then thefirst one is has r rows c k columns . so , second one as r k plus one rows c n column , but we knowthat c k is equal to r k plus . so this matrix will work . the final computation is going to be r into c kinto c n right , m into n into p the rows into the column , common number of column row into thefinal number of columns . so this final multiplication , we know how much it is going to cost . and tothis , we have to recursively add the inductive cost of having computed the two factors how muchtime it will takes us to do m prime how much time it will take us to do m prime . we have that thecost of m splitting at k is a cost of m to m k plus the cost of m k plus one to m n plus the lastmultiplication r into c k to c n. so , clearly this cost will vary for different case , and there are manynumber of cases . we said there are n minus choices of k , anything from to n minus we canchoose as k. there are n minus sub problems . so , when we did the longest common sub sequenceproblem , we had two sub problems . we could either drop the first letter a i or the second letter b j ,and then we have to consider two sub problems . we had no way of knowing which is better , so wedid them both and took the max . now here we have n minus different choices of k , we have no wayof knowing which of this case is better . so , again we try all of them and take the minimum . there wewere doing the maximum because we want the longest common subsequence , here we want theminimum cost so we choose that k which minimizes this split , and recursively each of those thingswould minimize their split and so on . so , that is the inductive structure . finally , we say that the costof multiplying m to m n is the minimum for all choices of k of the cost of multiplying m to m kplus the cost of multiplying m k plus to m n plus . of course , for that choose of k , we have to do onefinal multiplication which is to take these resulting sub matrices , so that is r into c k into c n. so ,when we take this , so we have m to m n , so we have picked m to m k. then as before what willhappens is that we will have to split this somewhere , so we will we will now end up having somesegment which is neither m nor m n , it starts at some m j and goes to m k. in general , we need toexpress this quantity for arbitrary left and right point , we can not assume that the left hand point iswe can not assume the right hand point is n right . in general , if we have a segment from m i to m j ,then we want the smallest value of among all the values of k from i to j minus , we want theminimum cost which occurs from computing the cost of m i to m k , and m k plus to m j , and thecost of this final multiplication which is r i into c k into c j. this quantity we will write as cost i j cost i jis a cost of computing the segment from m i to m j which involves picking the best k. so , m i to m j iscalled cost i j , and we use this same recursive inductive definition choose the best . the base casewell if we are just looking at a segment of length , supposing we just want to multiply one matrixfrom to , or to , or to nothing is to be done . it is a just matrix there is no multiplication , sothe cost is . we can then write out this cost i j equation saying the minimum over k of cost i k pluscost k plus j plus r i c k c j which is the actual multiplication . and of course , i is always going to beless than or equal to j , because we are doing it from left to right , so we can assume that the segmentis given to us with two end points where i is less than or equal to j. so , i is less than or equal to j , andwe look at cost i j as a kind of matrix then this whole area where i is greater than j is ruled out . so , weonly look at this diagonal . and the entries along the diagonal are the ones which are of the form icomma i , so all these entries are initially zero right . there is no cost involved with doing anymultiplication from position j to position j along this diagonal . now , in order to compute i comma j , ineed to pick a k , and i need to compute for that k all the values i mean i have to compute i k , and soit turns out that this corresponds to saying that if i want to compute a particular entry i comma j ,then i need to choose a good k. and in order to choose a good k , i need so this i can express in manydifferent ways . i can say pick , so for example , supposing i want to compute this particular thing then ihave to say pick this entry i to i and then i want the entry i plus to j. so , i have i plus to j this entry .these two entries i have to sum up otherwise , i have to take this entry and sum it up with this entry .in general , if i have a thing there , i will say if i choose this entry as my k point then i must add thisentry to get it up , and take this sum or i have to take this entry and add this entry and then add thisand so on . in general , we could have order n values i need to compute for this i need to compute , ineed all the values here and i need all the values here . i need something to the left and to thebottom , but if i start in the diagonal then it becomes easy , because i can actually say that if i haveinitially these values filled in , this is the base case . then to the left and below , i can fill in this becausei know it is values to the left , i know this value to the left and below , so i can fill up this diagonal . inthe next step , i can fill up this diagonal , because i have all the values to left below . now at this entry , ihave values to the left and below , so i can fill up this diagonal . so , i can fill it up diagonal by diagonal .this is the order in which i can fill up this table using this inductive definition because this is the wayin which the dependency is stored . this is the code for this particular thing . so , you can go through itand just check the only thing that you need to notice that we have used some . so what we are doingis , when we compute as we said one entry . supposing , we are computing this one entry then wewant to compute the minimum across many different pairs right this entry this entry and so on .remember what we did when you computed the maximum longest common sub word , we assumethat the maximum was zero , and every time we saw a bigger value we updated it . here , we want theminimum entry . so , what we do is we assume the minimum as some large number and every timewe see an entry , if it is smaller than the minimum we reduce it . that is what it is happening here ,when we start the loop we assume that the value for r c is actually infinity . now what is infinity ? wellyou can take infinity so that we can take for instance the product of all the dimensions that appear inthis problem . you know that the total dimension will not be more than that . so , you can take theproduct of all the dimensions you can take a very large number , it does not matter something relatedto what your problem as . so , we have not defined it in the code . the important thing is we arecomputing minimum . instead of starting with , and updating it when you do maximum you startwith the large value and keep shrinking it . so every time , we find a sub problem which is smaller thanthe current value that we have seen then we replace that value as the new minimum , so that is allthat is important here . everything else is just a way to make sure that we go it , go through this tablediagonal by diagonal , and for each diagonal we scan the row and the column and compute theminimum across all pairs in that row and column . as with this lcs problem , we have to fill an order nsquared size table , but the main difference between lcs and this is that in order to fill an entry in thelcs thing we have to look at only a constant number of entries . so , order mn or order n squared , butthe point was each entry takes constant time , so the effort involved is the same as size of the table ,m n table or takes m n time . here , unfortunately it is not the case right . we saw that an entry willtake time proportional to it is distance from the diagonal . in general , that will add an order n factor .though we have order n squared by two entries actually order n squared entries , we would have toaccount for order n work per entry because each entry has to scan the row to it is left in the columnbelow not just one entry away from it . and so this whole thing becomes order n cubed and not ordern square . so , it is this is some point to keep in mind that there could be problems , where thecomplexity is bigger than the table size . all the examples we saw before that is the reason to do thisexample . in all the examples we saw before , the fibonacci we had a table which is linear in n and ittook time linear in n to fill it . for the grid path and for longest common subsequence , we had tables ,which are m by n , but it took only n by m time or m by n time to fill that . here , we have a table whichis n by n , but it takes n cube time to fill it up because each entry it requires more than constant time ,it actually takes time proportional to n. we are in the realm of inductive definitions , recursivefunctions and efficient evaluation of these using memorization and dynamic programming . so , weare looking examples of problems where the main target is to identify the inductive structure andonce you identify the inductive structure then the recursive structure of the program becomesapparent from which you can extract the dependencies and figure out what kind of memo table youhave and how you will can iteratively using dynamic programming . this is something which comes tothe practice and by looking at more examples hopefully the procedure become clearer , but the keything to dynamic programming is to be able to understand the inductive structure . so , you need totake a problem , identify how the main problem depends on its sub parts and using this come up withthe nice inductive definition which you can translate in to a recursive program . once you have therecursive program then the memo table and the dynamic programming almost comes outautomatically from that . this is the problem involve in words . so , what you want to do is take a pairof words and find the longest common subword . for instance , here we have secret and secretary andsecret is already also inside secretary and clearly secret is the longest word in secret itself . thelongest subword that is common is the word secret and it has length . let we move to the next thinkbisect and trisect then actually this should be isect that say which has length , similarly if we havebisect and secret then sec . when we say subword , of course we do not mean a word in the sense wejust mean a sequence of letters . so , s e c is the longest common subword in has length and if youhave two very different words like director and secretary , sometimes you might have only smallthings , for example , here r e and e c are , for examples of subword but there are really very longwords which are common to the subword is only length . here is the more formal description right .so , supposing i have two words u and v. so , u is of length m and v is of length n and the numberpositions using python notation and number to n minus , to n minus then what i want to do isable to start at a i and go k steps . so , i to i plus k minus and b j to j plus k minus such that , thesetwo segments are identical , this is a common subword and we want to find the longest such commonsubword , what is the k , we do not even want to subword , will find that subword will be a byproduct .you first need to just find k , what is the length of the longest common subword of u n ? there is abrute force algorithm that you could use which is you just start at i and j in two word . in each wordyou can start a position i in u j in v and see how far you can go before you find they are not . so , youmatch a i and b j right . so , if a i and b j work then its fine . so , it should be b j and if a i and b j workthen you go to a i plus b j plus and so on and whenever we find two letters which differ then thecommons adverse starting at a j has ended and you so from i j i have a common subword ofsomething . now , among all the i js you look for the longest one and that becomes your answer . now ,this unfortunately is effectively now an n cube algorithm . we think of m and n can be equaltechnically m n squared because there are m times n different choices of i and j and in general istarted i j and then i have to go from i to the end right and from j to the end . so , we have to do a scanfor each i j in this scan in general adds up to an order , order n factor and so we have order m nsquared or order n cube if you like . our goal is to find some inductive structure which makes thisthing computationally more efficient . so , what is the inductive structure ? well we have already kindof seen it when can we say that there is a commons subword starting at i j of length k , the first thingis that we need this a i to be the same as b j. so , i need this condition and now if this is a commonssubword of length k at i j then what remains of subword namely this segment from i plus to thisand j plus to this must also match and they must be in turn be a k minus length subword fromhere to there . so , we want to say that there is a k length subword starting at i j if a i is equal to b j andfrom i plus and j plus there is a k minus length subword . in other words , i can now write thefollowing definition , i can say that the longest common the length of the longest common subword lc w starting from i j. well , if they two or not the same if a i is not the same the same there is nocommon subword at all because if i start from i immediately have two different letters . so , when thelength is otherwise i can inductively find out what is the longest common subword to may rightstart i plus start from j plus . find out what i can do from there and to word i can add one letterbecause this current letter a i is equal to b j. so , i get one plus that and the base case of the boundarycondition is when one of the two words is empty right . if i have no letters left , if i have gone i j i amlooking at difference combinations i and j. so , if either i or j has reached the end of the word thenthere is no possibility of a common subword at that point . so , when we reach the end of one of thewords say answer must be . this gives us the following definitions . so , remember that u is actuallyhas length m. so , it has to m minus . so , what we will do is , we will add a position of m to indicatethat we have crossed the last letter . similarly , v has to n minus has valid positions . so , we will usein this to n. so , if i becomes m or j becomes n it means that that corresponding index has gonebeyond the end of the word right . so , this should be m and this should be n. we have that if youreach m then lcw of n comma j is because we have gone past the length u. similarly , if you reachn , but lcw of i comma n is because you gone past the length of v and if you are not gone past thelength , if you are somewhere inside the word in a valid position then the length is going to be if thetwo positions are not the same . if a i is not equal to b j , otherwise inductively i compute the lengthfrom i plus and j plus and add one to it . this is the case when a i is equal to b j because thatsegment i can extend by . so , this is just stating in an equation form the inductive definition that wepurposely earlier . so , here we saw example for bisect and secret . we have position to and thenwe have the position indicating the end of the word and now remember that the way our inductivedefinition was phrased i j depends only on i plus j plus . so , actually the dependencies at this waysto the arrows are indicating that and in order solve this i need to solve this first . the value atcomma depends on the value comma . in order to solve this i do not need to solve anythingbecause everything once i. so , in order to solve this i only need to so anyway . we can basically , wehave this simple thing which says that the corner and the actually the right column and the bottomthing do not require anything and we know that because those are all s. we can actually fill in thosevalues as because that is given to us by definition and now we can start , for instance , we can startwith this value because its value is known . we will look at whether this t matches that t it is that . so ,we take one plus the value two is bottom . so , we get and then we can walk up and do the samething at every point we will say that if c is not the same as t. so , none of these letters if you look atthese letters here right none of these letters are t. so , for all of these letters i will get directlybecause it says that a i is not equal to b j. i do not even have to look at i plus j plus , i directly saysthat because is not there . so , in this way i can fill up this column . this is like our grid pack thing ican fill by column by column even though there the dependency was to the left and bottom and herethe dependence is diagonally bottom right . i can fill up column by column and i can keep going and ifi keep going i find an entry . so , the entry is the largest entry that i see and that is actual answerthis entry . and now we said earlier that we are focusing on the length of the longest commonsubword not the word itself in the reason . we need to we can afford to do that is because we canactually read of the answer once we have got the lengths . so , we ask ourselves why we did we get ahere . we got here because we came as plus . since we came as plus it must mean thatthese two letters are the same . so , we got here is because it is plus . so , these two letters mustalso be the same . finally , we got one here because this is plus . so , these two letters are the same .therefore , these three letters must be the same . if you walk down from that magical value , thelargest value and we follow the sequence then we can read of and the corresponding row or columnbecause they are the same , your actual subword which is the longest common subword for thesetwo . here is a very simple implementation in python . so , all it says is that you start with the twowords u and v , you initialize this lcw thing at the boundary at the nth row on the nth column andthen , now you remember the maximum value . so , you keep that by initializing the maximum value toand then you fill up in this particular case the column order . for each column , then for each rowand that column you fill up the thing using the equation , if it is equal i to plus otherwise as it sayand if i see and a new value this is the thing where i update if i see and new entry which is biggerthan the entry which is currently the maximum , i update the maximum . so , this is allows me toquickly find out what is the maximum length overall and finally , when i go through this look i wouldfilled up the entire table and i will return the maximum value i saw over . so , when we did it by bruteforce we had an order m n square algorithm . here we are filling up table which is of size order m by nand each entry only require us to check the ith position in the word the jth position in the world anddepending on that , if necessary look up one entry i plus j plus . it is a constant time update . weneed to fill up one table of size order m n each update takes constant time . so , this algorithm bringsus from m n squared in the brute force case to m n using dynamic programming . a much more usefulproblem in practice than the longest common subword is what is called the longest commonsubsequence . so , the difference between a subword and a subsequence is that we are allowed todrop some letters in between . so , for instance , if you go back to the earlier examples of secret andsecretary , there is no problem because the subword is actually the entire thing and again for bisectand trisect also it is the same thing , but if we have bisect and secret earlier if we did not allow us toskip , we could only match sec with sec , but now we can take this extra t and we can skip there andmatch this t as say that s e c t is a subsequence in the right word , which matches the correspondingsubsequence which is also a subword in the left word in the right is not a subword . for thesubsequence i have to drops some letters to get s e c t. similarly , if i have secretary and director theni can find things like e c t r e c t r in both of them by skipping over with judiciously . so , why is this arebetter problem ? well we will see that , but effectively what skipping mean , skipping means that i getsegments which are connected by gaps .. so , i get this segment then i want to continue this segments .so , i look for the next match , i skip , but the next match must come to my right . it must come to theright and below the current match because i can not go backwards in a word and start the matchagain . so , i can not , for instance go here and say that this is an extension because this requires me togo back and reuse the e that i have seen in sec to match . the second e in secret which is not allowed ,i can keep going forward which in the table corresponds to going to the right and back to the rightand down . so , i am going increasing the order of index in both words and i can group together thesethings and this is what the longest kind of subsequences . so , we could in principle look at the longestcommon subword answer and look for these clever connections , but it turns out there is a muchmore direct way to do it in an inductive way . the motivations , well one of the big motivations forsubsequence matching comes from things like genetics , for instance , when we compare the genessequence of two organisms they are rarely equal . so , what we are looking for are large matches ,where there might be some junk genes in between which you want to discard . so , you want to saythat two genes sequences or two organisms are similar , if there are large overlaps over the entiregenome not just looking for individuals segment along , but by just throwing away the minimal thingson both sides , we can make that align as we call . and other important example is something called adiff , which is unix command compared to text files . so , this treats in fact , line by line two files as aword . so , each line is compared to each line in the other file if the line match they considered to beequal and this is the good way of comparing one version of the file with other version of the file .supposing you are collaborating on a document or program with somebody else and you send it byemail and they send it by . so , they had made some changes then diff tells you quickly , what are thedifferences between the file you sent and the file you go back and diff essentially is doing the samething is trying to find the longest match between the file that you sent of the file you got back andthe shortest way in which you can transform one to the other by change in the few lines its . theseare some typical example of this longest common subsequence problem and therefore , it is usuallymuch more useful in practice in the longest common subword problem . what is the inductivestructure of the longest common subsequence problem ? as before we have the words laid out . so ,we can say a to a m or a minus a n minus , it does not matter how you choose it , but in thepicture it says a n , but if you want to you can remove this last . so , a to a n minus is the first wordb to b n minus is the second word and now there are two cases . the first case is the easy case ,supposing i have these two things are equal then like before i can inductively solve the problem for aand b onwards and add this . i can extend that solution by saying a match is b and thenwhatever matches . what is the subsequence , the subsequence actually is some kind of a matching , itsays that you know it will say that this matches this and then this matches this , these are the sameand this match is this and then this match is this and so on . only thing is that these lines can not overlap , they must be kept going from left to right without over lap . so , this kind of paring up equalletters , the maximum way in which again to do this is a longest common subsequence . now , what weare saying is that if i can actually match the first two things then i should match them and then i cango ahead and match the rest as i want , and the reason is very simple , supposing the best solution didnot match these supposing you claim that the best solution actually requires meet match a and b .well , if i could match a and b i can also undo it and match a and b and then continue becausea and b if they match and a if match is to right . so , i can take that solution and change it to asolution where a matches b . the first two letters are the same and might is well go with that andsay it is one plus the result of optimally solved in the rest , what if they not the same this is theinteresting case . supposing , these are not the same then what happens . then can we just go aheadand ignore a and b , no right . so , it could be that a actually matches b or it could be that bmatches a , we do not know , but we certainly know that a does not match b . so , we have todrop one of them because we can not make a solution a matching b , but we do not know whichone . so , what we do is we take two sub problems , we say let us assume b is not part of the solutionthen the best solution come out of a to a and minus and b to b n , b is exclude because ican not match it to the a and whatever a matches must match to the right . so , i must go aheadwith it . but maybe this is the wrong choice . the other choice should be to keep b and drop a andwhich case i do a to a m minus and b to b m. these are two different choices which one tochoose , well since we do not know we solve them both . we solve if a i a is not b we solved boththese problems a to a m minus b and a to a m minus b solve of them take the maximumone whichever one is better it is the one . this in general will take us deeper in the words . so , we saida b will require solved it for a and b or a b a and b . so , in general we have a i and b j right .again since we have a i and b j then you will use the same logic if a i is equal to b j then it is one plusthe rest . so , this is the good case , if a i is not equal to b j then what we do is we look at the samething , we drop b j and solve it and symmetrically we drop a i and solve it and take the better of thetwo . we take max of the solution from i and the solution from j plus . if we say like we had beforethat lcs of i j is the length of the longest common starting to i and j if a i is equal to b j it will be oneplus the length start it from i plus j plus plus . if it is not equal it will be the maximum of the twosub problems where either increment i or increment j and has with the longest common subwordwhen we go to the last position m and n we get . so , here the dependency is slightly morecomplicated because depending on the case , i either have to look at i plus j plus or i have to lookat i plus j or i j plus . so , i had for this square , i had looked at its right neighbor , right diagonalneighbor and the bottom neighbor , but once again the ones which have no dependency appear . so ,earlier we had for longest common subword we had only this dependency this mean that even asquare like this had no dependencies because there is nothing to its bottom right . but now , forinstance if we look at this picture , since we are looking bottom right and left , if i look at this itsdependencies are in three directions two of the directions are empty , but this direction there isdependence . so , i can not fill up this square directly the can only square , i can fill up directly is thisone because it has nothing to its right nothing in diagonally and nothing below . so , i start from thereand i put a and as before we can go down this because now once we have this , we have everythingwould to its left and once we have this and because we are beyond the word where at the m , thisdummy position , the row and column becomes , but the important thing to remember is the rowand column become not because they have no dependency , but because we can systematically , fillit up exactly like in the grid parts we can fill up the bottom row and the left most column there , herethe right most column . now , once we have this we can fill up this part right and then again we canhave two and three c entries we can fill up this . we have three entries we can fill up this , we havethree entries we can fill up this and we can fill up this column and we can do this column and we cando this column by column and we propagate it and then finally , the value the propagates here is ourlongest length of the longest common subsequences , we could also do this row by row . now , how dowe trace out the actual solution when the solution grows , whenever we increment the number ? so ,we can ask why is this ? so , we say that this is not because we did plus because s is not equal tob , we did because we got the max value from here , why is this again i is not equal to s. so , we gotthe max value from here why is this , oh s is equal to x. we must have got it by plus , why is thisbecause e plus e. so , we must have got it from here . so , we follow the path according to the choicesthat we made in applying the inductive function in order to generate the value at each parts . in otherwords , for each cell i j that we write we remember whether we wrote it because it was one plus thatdiagonal neighbor or the maximum of the left in the right in which case we record whether the leftor the bottom it was the maximum . now , in this a picture every time we take a diagonal step itmeans we actually had a match . so , this is the match the first one here is a match s equal to s , this isthe match e equal to e , this is the match c equal to c. now , after this point we are flat and then a atthis point again we have a match . so , we get s e c and t. so , we can read of the diagonal steps alongthis kind a explanation of the longest number largest number we got and each diagonals step willcontribute to the final solution , now there could be more than , because we have not got anyexample in this case , but sometimes the max could be one of in both directions if i am taking max ofthe left the right neighbor and the bottom they could be the same . i could have the situation like thissupposing i landed up here then i do not know whether i got it from here or from here . so , i mighthave two different extensions which lead me to a solution . so , the longest common subsequenceneed not be unique , but you can recover at least one by following this path so , here is the pythoncode is not very different from the earlier one . we can just see we have just initialize the last row andthe bottom row on the last column and then as before you walk up row by row , column by columnand filling using the equation and in this case , we do not have to keep track of the maximum valueand keep updating because the maximum value automatically propagates to the value . just likethe longest common subword , here once again we are filling in a table of size m times n. each entryonly requires you to look at most do three other entries . so , one to the right one to the bottom rightin that the one below . so , it is a constant amount of work . so , m n entries constant amount of workper entry , this takes time m times n. in the last lecture we looked at how to make iterative orinductive definitions more efficient than na ve recursion , and we saw memoization and dynamicprogramming as tools to do this . now , let us look at a typical problem and see how we can apply thistechnique . so , here is a problem of grid paths . so , we have a grid here , you can imagine there areroads which are arranged in a rectangular format . we can imagine that the intersections arenumbered . so , we have , at the bottom left corner and in this case , we have , becausegoing across from left to right we have , , , , different intersections and going up . so , wehave at , the top right corner . if these are roads the constraint that we have is that one can onlytravel up or right . so , you can go up a road or you can go right , but you can not come down . this isnot allowed . these are one way roads which goes up and right , and what we want to ask is howmany ways there are to go from the bottom left corner to the top right corner . so , we want to countthe number of what are called grid paths . so , a grid path is one which follows this right . so , we wantto know how many such different paths are there which take us from , to , only going up orright . so , here is one path drawn in blue . here is a different path drawn in red and notice that thesepaths actually , start in different directions from the first point and they never meet except with thetarget . they do not overlap at all . on the other hand we could have paths which overlap . this yellowpath overlaps a part of its way with the blue path in this section and it also overlaps with the redpath in portions . there are many different ways in which we can choose to make this up and rightmoves and the question is , how many total such different paths are there ? there is a very standardand elegant combinatorial solution . so , one way of thinking about this is just to determine , howmany moves we have to make . we have to go from to in one direction and to in the otherdirection . so , we have to make a total number of horizontal moves and vertical moves , in otherwords every path no matter which direction we started and which move , which choice of moves wemake must make steps and of these must be horizontal steps and must be vertical steps ,because they all take us from , to , . so , all we have to do since we know that these stepsare horizontal and are vertical is to just demarcate which ones are horizontal and which arevertical . now once we know which ones are horizontal we know what sequence they come inbecause the first horizontal step takes us from column to column , second takes us from one to. so , we can not do it in any order other than that . so , we have in other words we have slots ,where we can make moves and then we just say first we make an up move , then we make a rightmove then we make an up move then make another up move and so on . so , every path can bedrawn out like this as up moves and right moves and if we fix the right moves thenautomatically all the remaining slots must be up moves or conversely . it is either choose , it isthe way of choosing positions to make the right move out of the , and it turns out that thedefinition of choose is clearly the same as choose because we could also fix the upmoves and the definition is basically ... if you know the definitions ... then n choose k is n factorial by kfactorial into n minus k factorial . this k and n minus k basically says that minus is . so , we geta symmetric function in terms of k and n minus k. in this case we can apply this formula if you wouldlike to call it that and directly get that the answer is . there does not appear to be much tocompute other than writing out large factorials and then seeing what the number comes . but theproblem becomes more interesting , if we constrain it by saying that some of these intersections areblocked for instance , supposing there is some road work going on and we can not go through thisintersection , . this is the intersection comma second column and the fourth row countingfrom below . it s actually comma , but , , , yeah comma . now , if we can not go through thisthen any path which goes through this particular block intersection should no longer be counted . outto those some paths are no longer valid paths . for instance , in the earlier thing the blue paththat we had drawn actually goes through this , the red path does not , where the yellow pathoverlapped with the blue path unfortunately in this bad section . it also passes through this . thereare some paths which are allowed from the and some which are not . so , how do we determinehow many paths survived this kind of block . so , again we can use a combinatorial argument in orderto be blocked a path must go to , and then from , to , . if we could only count how manypaths go from , to , and then how many paths go from , to , , these are all the badpaths . so , we can count these bad paths and subtract them from the good paths . how do we countthe bad paths well we can just solve a smaller version of the problem . so , we have an intermediatetarget . so , we solve this grid how many paths go from here to here , how many paths go from here tohere . so , from , to , we get plus remember it plus it was a curve or get , pluschoose . so , we get and from here to here the difference is that we have to do in both directionsand so , we have to go sorry we have to go up and we have to go right , we are at , . so , wehave to go from to and from to . so , we have plus choose , ways of going from ,to this and each of the ways in the bottom , can be combined with a way on the top . so , we multiplythis and we get paths which pass through this bad intersection , we subtract this from theoriginal number and we get paths which remain . so , a combinatorial approach still works .now , what happens if we put such intersections ? so , we will you can do the same thing we cancount all the parts which get blocked because of the first intersection , we can count all the pathswhich pass through in this case , is the second intersection which has been blocked . so , we cancount all these parts which pass through , . this we know how to do we just computed it for ,, but the problem is that there are some paths like the yellow paths which pass through both ,and , . so , we need a third count we need to count paths which pass through both of these andmake sure we do not double count them . so , one way is that we just add these back . this issomething which is called in combinatorics inclusion and exclusion . so , when we have theseoverlapping exclusions , then we have to count the overlaps and include them back . we have to keepdoing this step by step . if we have holes we get an even more complicated inclusion exclusionformula and it rapidly becomes very complicated even to calculate the formula that we need to get .is there a simpler way to do this ? let us look at the inductive structure of the problem , suppose wesay we want to get in one step to intersection i , j . how can we reach this in one step since our roadsonly go left to right and bottom to top , the only way we can reach i , j is by taking a right edge fromit s left neighbor . so , we can go from i , j to i , j or we can go from below from i , j to i , j .notice that if a path comes from the left it must be different from a path that comes from below . so ,every path that comes from the left is different from every path that comes from below . so , we canjust add these up . in other words if we say that paths i , j is the quantity we want to compute , wewant to count the number of paths from , to i , j . these paths must break up into disjoint setsthose which come from the left which recursively or inductively if you prefer to say is exactly thequantity paths i , j . how many paths are there which reach i , j every one of these paths can beextended by a right edge to reach i , j and , they will all be different similarly paths i , j are all thosepaths which come from below , because they all reach the point just below i , j from there each ofthem will be extended in a unique way to i , j this gives us our simple inductive formula , paths i , j isjust the sum of paths i , j and paths i , j . then we need to of course , investigate the base cases inthis case the real base case is just paths , in how many ways can i go from , and just stay in, ? well there is only one way , it is tempting to say ways , but it is not ways its one wayotherwise nothing will happen . so , we have one way by just doing nothing to stay in , and if weare now moving along the left column , if you are moving along the left column then there are nopaths coming from its left because we are already on the leftmost column . so , all the paths to , jmust be extensions of paths which have come from below up to , j . similarly if you are on thebottom row there is no way to come from below because we are already on the lowest set of roads .so , paths i , can only come from the left , from paths i , . this gives us a direct way to actuallycompute this even with holes because , the only difference now is that if , there is a hole we justdeclare that no paths can reach that place . so , we just add an extra clause which says paths i , j is ifthere is a hole at i , j otherwise we use exactly the same inductive formulation and now whathappens is , if i have a hole below me , if i have a hole below me , no paths can come from thatdirection because by definition paths i , j at that point is . so , once again if we now apply this anddo this using the standard translation from the inductive definition to a recursive program , we willfind that we will wastefully recompute the same quantity multiple times for instance paths , . ifwe have paths , , it will require me to compute this and this . these are the sub problems forpaths , , namely , and , but , in turn in order to compute , i will have to computewhatever is to its left and below it and in order to compute , i will also have to compute what isto its left and below it and now what we find is that this quantity namely , is computed twice ,once because of the left neighbor of , and once because of the neighbor below , . so , aswe saw before we could use memoization to make sure that we never compute i , j twice by storinga table i comma j , and every time we compute a new value for i comma j we store it in the table andevery time we look up , we need to compute one we first check the table , if it is already there we lookit up , otherwise we will compute it and store it , but since we know there is a table and we knowwhat the table structure is basically it is all entries of the form i comma j. we can also see if we canfill up this table iteratively by just examining the sub problems in terms of their dependencies . ingeneral a node the value depends on things to it left and below . if there are no dependencies , it musthave nothing to its left and nothing below and there is only one such point namely , . this is theonly point which is the base case which has nothing to its left and nothing below so its value isdirectly read . so , we start from here . remember that the base value at , is one , and now oncewe have done this it turns out you remember the road dependency , it said i , is i , . so , we canfill up this , because this has only one dependency which is known now . in this way i can fill up theentire row and say that all along this row there is only one path namely the path that starts goingright and keeps going right . now we can go up and see that this thing is also known because , it alsodepends only on the value below it and once that is known then these are known . so i can addthem up remember the value at any position is just the value to its left plus the value to its bottomand now i start to get some non trivial values , and in this way i can fill up this table row by row and ateach point when i come to something i will get the fact with the dependency unknown . the next rowlooks like this and the next row . now we come to the row with holes . so , for the row with holes ,wherever we hit a hole instead of writing the value that we would normally get by adding its left andbottom neighbour we deliberately put a because that means , that no path is actually allowedpropagating through that row . now , when we come to the next row , the holes will automaticallyblock the paths coming from the wrong direction . so , here for instance we have only paths comingfrom the left because we have no paths coming from below similarly we have paths coming fromthe left and no paths coming from below . this is how our inductive definition neatly allows us to dealwith holes and from that inductive definition we recognize the dependency structure and weimagine the memo table and now we are filling up this memo table row by row so that at every pointwhen we reach an i , j value its dependent values are already known . so , we can continue doing thisrow by row , and eventually we find look there are paths which avoid these two . so , we couldalso do the same thing in a different way instead of doing the bottom row , we can do the left columnand the same logic says , that we can go all the way up then we can start in the second column , go allthe way up and do this column by column and not unexpectedly , we should get the same answer .there is a third way to do this . so , once we have one at , then we can fill both the first elementabove it and the first element to its right . so , we can do this diagonal , now notice that any diagonalvalue like this one has both its entries . this has only one entry , this also . so i can now fill up thisdiagonal . i can go one more diagonal , then i can go one more diagonal . so , we can also fill up thisthing diagonal by diagonal . the dependency structure may not require us to fill it in a particular waywe might have very different ways to fill it up , all we want to do is systematically fill up this table inan iterative fashion not recursively we do not want to call f of i , j and then look at f of i minus , j. wewant to directly say when we reach i , j we have the values we need , but the values we need couldcome in multiple different orders . so , we could have done it row wise , we could have done it columnwise and here you see we can do it diagonally , but it does not matter so long as we actually get allthe values that we need . so , one small point , so we have said that we can use memoization or wecan use dynamic programming . one of the advantages of using dynamic programming is it avoids thisrecursive call . so , recursion we had mentioned earlier , also in some earlier lecture , comes with aprice because whenever you make a recursive call , you have to suspend a computation , store somevalues , restore those values . there is a kind of administrative cost with recursion . so , actually thoughit looks like only a single operation and we call fib of n minus or fib of n minus . there is actually acost involved with suspending this operation , going there and coming back . so , saving on recursion isone important reason to move from memoization to dynamic programming , but what dynamicprogramming does is to evaluate every value regardless of whether its going to be useful for the finalanswer or not . in the grid path thing there is one situation where you can illustrate this . imagine thatwe have these obstacles placed exactly one step inside the boundary . now , if we want to reach thisits very clear that i can only come all the way along the top row or all the way up the rightmostcolumn , there is no other way i can reach them . so , anything which is inside this these positionsthere is no way to go from here out . there is no point in counting all these values . we have thisregion which is in the shadow of these obstacles which can never reach the final thing . so , when wedo memoization when we come back and recursively explore it will never ask us to come herebecause it will never pass these boundaries . on the other hand our dynamic programming willblindly walk through everything . so , it will do row by row , column by column and it will eventuallyfind the s , but it will fill the entire n by n grid . in this case how many will memoization do ? it will dobasically only the boundary . it will do only order m n. so , we have a memo table which has only alinear number of entries in terms of the rows and columns and a dynamic programming entry , whichis quadratic if both were n it will be n squared , thus is n. this suggests that dynamic programmingin this case , is wastefully computing a vast number of entries . so n squared is much larger than nremember . it will take us enormous amount of time to compute it , if we just count the cost per entry ,but the flip side is that each entry that we need to add to the memo table requires one recursive call .the reality is that these recursive calls will typically cost you much more , than the wastefulness ofcomputing the entire table . in general even though you can analyze the problem and decide thatmemoization will result in many fewer new values being computed than dynamic programming . it isusually sound to just use dynamic programming as the default way to do the computation . we sawearlier that inductive definitions often provide a nice way to get a hold of the functions we want tocompute . now we are familiar with induction for numbers . for instance , we can define the factorialfunction in terms of the base case f of , and in terms of the inductive case saying f of n is n timesfactorial of n minus . what we saw is we can also define inductively functions on structures like lists ,so for instance , we can take as the base case an empty list , and in the inductive case , we canseparate the task of sorting of list into doing something with the initial element and something withthe rest . insertion sort can be defined in terms of insert function as follows . so , isort of the base casefor the empty case just gives us the empty list . and then if you want to sort a list with n elements , wepull out the first element right and then we insert it into the result of inductively sorting the rest .this is a very attractive way of describing the dependency of the function that we want to computethe value that we are trying to compute on smaller values , and it gives us a handle on how to goabout computing it . the main benefit of an inductive definition is that it directly yields a recursiveprogram . so , we saw this kind of a program for factorial which almost directly follows a definitionsaying that f of is and f of n is n into f n minus . so , we can just directly read it talk more or lessand translate it . the only thing we have done is we have taken care of some error case , where ifsomebody feeds a negative number , we will still say , and not go into a loop . in general , when wehave such inductive definitions , what we do is we have sub problems that we have to solve in orderto get to the answer we are trying to reach . so , for instance , to compute factorial of n , one of thethings we need to do is compute factorial of n minus . so , we call factorial of n minus as subproblem of factorial n. now in turn factorial of n minus requires us to compute factorial n minus ,so actually if you go down the chain , the factorial n sub problems are all the factorials for valuessmaller than n. similarly , for insertion sort , in order to sort the full list , we need to sort all theelements excluding the first one what is called the tail of the list , and in turn we need to sort its tailand so on . in general , when we do insertion sort we will find that we need to sort things a segmentof the list . so , we can in general talk about x i to x j. and in all these cases , what the inductivedefinition tells us is how to compute the actual value of f for our given input y by combining thesolutions to these sub problems for instance , in factorial we combine it by multiplying the currentinput with the result of solving it for the next smaller input . for insertion sort , we combine it byinserting the first value into the result of solving the smaller input that is the tail of the list . let uslook at one particular problem , which will highlight an issue that we have to deal with when we arelooking at inductive specifications and naively translating them into programs . the fibonaccinumbers are a very famous sequence which were invented by fibonacci , and they occur in natureand they are very intuitive and most of you would have seen them . the fibonacci numbers are ,and then you add . so , plus is , plus is , , and so on . so , you just keep adding the previoustwo numbers and you go on . the inductive definition says that th fibonacci number is the firstfibonacci number is and after that for two onwards , the nth fibonacci number is obtained by subadding the previous two . the fibonacci number is fibonacci plus fibonacci . as before we candirectly translate this into an inductive into a recursive program . we can just write a python functionfib which says if n is or n is , you return the value n itself . so , if n is return , if n is , we return .otherwise , you compute the value by recursive to recursively calling fibonacci on n minus and nminus , add these two and return this value . here is the clear case of an inductive definition thathas a natural recursive program extracted from it . let us try to compute a value and see whathappens . so , supposing we want to compute fibonacci of using this definition . so , fibonacci of ,we will go into the else clause and say we need to compute fibonacci of n minus namely and nminus namely . as fibonacci of , leaves us with two problems to compute , fibonacci of andfibonacci of . so , we do these in some order let us go left to right . so , we pick fibonacci of , andthis in turn will require us to compute fibonacci of and fibonacci of by just applying the samedefinition to this value . similarly , we go to the left of the two sub problems fibonacci of requiresand requires and . now for and fortunately we can exit without making a recursive call ifn is equal to or n is equal to , we just return the value . so , we get back fibonacci as andfibonacci as . so , with this , we can complete the computation of fibonacci , we get value isplus in other words . so , fibonacci of is . now , we are back to fibonacci of . so , we havecomputed for fibonacci of , the left case fibonacci of . now we have to compute the right case .and once again we find the fibonacci of being a base case it gives us , and now we can combinethis and get fibonacci of is . now , we are back to fibonacci of . and we have computed the leftside of fibonacci of . so , we need to compute the right side . and now what happens is we end uphaving to compute fibonacci of again , even though we already know the value . we naively have toexecute fibonacci of call and , again propagate the values and back up add them up and get. now , we can compute fibonacci of is plus . and now we are finally , back to the original callwhere we had to compute fibonacci of and fibonacci of . so , we are done with . now , we wantto do fibonacci of . notice that we have already computed fibonacci of , but this will blindlyrequire us to call this function again . so , we will again have to execute this full tree , go all the waydown , go all the way up and eventually fibonacci of will of course , give us the same answer namely, which we already knew , but we would not take exploit or we would not take advantage of the factthat we knew it . and in this way , we get plus and therefore , fibonacci of is . the point to notein this is that we are doing many things again and again . in this particular computation , the largestthing that we repeat is fibonacci of . so , as a result of this re computation of the same value againand again , though we in principle only need n minus sub problems . if we have fib of , we need tofib of , fib of , fib of and so on . n subproblems , if we do n't include fib of , but some of these subproblems like in this case fibonacci of , we compute repeatedly in a wasteful way . as a result , weend up solving an exponential number of solve sub problems even though there are only order nactual problems to be solved . so , what we want to do is move away from this naive recursiveimplementation of an inductive definition , and try to work towards never reevaluating a subproblem . this is easy to do , if we could only remember the sub problems that we have solved before ,then all we have to do is look up the value we already computed rather than recompute it . so , whatwe need is a kind of a table , a table where we store the values we have computed and before we goand compute a value , we first check the table . if the table has an answer , we take the table 's answerand go ahead . if the table does not have an answer then we apply the recursive definition computeit , and then we add it to the table . this table is normally called a memory table to memorize andfrom this , we get this word memoization . it is actually memo and not memorization memoization inthe sense of write yourself a memo , memo is like a reminder , write yourself a reminder that this hasbeen done before . memoization is the process by which when we are computing a recursivefunction , we compute the values one at a time , and as we compute them we store them in a tableand look up the table before we recompute any . here is how a computation of fibonacci of wouldgo , if we keep a table . this is our table here right . so , we have a table where in some order , it doesnot really matter for now in some order as and when we find fibonacci of k for some k , we justrecord it . and notice that this table is empty , even though we know the base case of fibonacci ofand fibonacci of are and respectively , we do not assume you know it , because it will come outas the first time we hit the base case it will come out of the recursive definition . let us see how itgoes right . so , we start fibonacci of as usual , it says do and , says do and , says do and, says do and . and now from our basic case , the base case in the function , we will get backthat fib of is . so , we store this in the table , this is the first value we have actually computed .notice we did not assume we knew it , when we came to it in the base case we put it into the table .same way , fib of is we did not know it before we put it in the table . now we come up and werealize that fib of is now available to us , it is plus is . so , we store that in the table . we say for kequal to , fib of k is . now we come back to fib of , and now we go down and it asks us tocompute fib of again . now although this does not take us any work , because it is a base case we donot actually exploit that fact . we first look in the table and say is there an entry for k equal to , yesthere is and so we pick it up . we highlight in orange the fact that this value was actually notrecomputed , but looked up in the table , so from plus , we now have fibonacci of is . now wego back up to fibonacci of , and it asks us to compute the second half of its sub problems , namelyfibonacci of . once again we find that there is an entry for in our table . so , we mark it in orange ,and we just take the value from the table without expanding and computing the tree again as we haddone before when we did the naive computation . now , plus is , so we have fibonacci of . so ,we have to now go back and compute the other branch fibonacci of , but once again has anargument k is in our table . so , we have an entry here for . so , we can just look up fibonacci of andsay oh , it is two . so , once again we mark it in orange . and so now , we have fibonacci of is plusand that is , and then now this is a new value , so we enter that . notice therefore , that every valuewe computed , we expanded the tree or even looked up the base case only once according to thefunction definition . every subsequent time , we needed a value we just looked it up in the table , andwe can see that the table grows exactly as many times as much as there are sub problems to besolved and we never solved a sub problem twice in the sense of computing it twice . we solved it bylooking at the table . this is a very easy step to incorporate into our fibonacci table , the fibonaccifunctions . so , we just add this red code . the green lines are those ones we have already had before .now what fibonacci says is , the first thing you do when you get a number is try and look up thetable . if there is a value fibonacci of n , which is defined then return that value otherwise , we gothrough the recursive computation . this is the usual computation which will make a recursive calland eventually come up with a new value which is the value for this particular n. so , before wereturn this value back as a result of this function , we store it in the table . henceforth , if this value n isever invoked again , we never have to look up the thing we never have to compute it it will be in thetable right . it is very simple as we said when you get an argument n for which you want to computethe function , you first check the table , if it is there in the table you do not do anything more you justreturn the table value . if it is not in the table , you apply your recursive definition to compute it , justlike you would normally . having computed it you first store it in the table , so that future accesses tothis function will work without having to do this recursion and then you return the value you got .this can work for any combination of arguments . you just need a table , in python terms you justneed a dictionary for every combination of arguments if that value has been computed before thatkey will be there in our table . this table in general in python would be a dictionary and not a listbecause the arguments could be any particular values . they could some could be string , some couldbe numbers , they need not be continuous that is all . we basically for given the particularcombination of arguments , we look up whether that combination of keys is there in the dictionary ifso we look it up and return it . otherwise , we compute a new value for this combination , store it andthen return it . so , we have glossed over little few things for instance typically where if you want toreally write this properly in python way we have to use some exceptions and all that , but this is moreor less the skeleton of what we need to do . this brings us to the main topic that we want to do thisweek in a couple of lectures which is called dynamic programming . so , dynamic programming is justa strategy to further optimize this memoized recursion . this memoized recursion tells us that we willstore values into a table as and when they are computed . now it is very clear that in an inductivedefinition , we need to get to the base case and then work ourselves backwards up from the basecase , to the case we have at hand . that means , there are always some values some base values forwhich no further values need to be computed these values are automatically available to us . wehave some problems which have sub problems , and some other problems which have no subproblems . if a problem has a sub problem , we can not get the problem , we can not get fibonacci offive unless we solve its sub problems , fibonacci and . but if we have a base case that fibonacci ofor fibonacci of , we do not have any sub problems , so we can solve them directly . this is a kind ofdependency . so , we have to solve the sub problems in the dependency order , we can not getsomething which is dependent on something else until that something else has been solved , but alittle thought tells us that this dependency order must be acyclic , we can not have a cycle ofdependency . so , if one value it is like depends on , depends on , and again depends on ,because there will be no way to actually resolve this right . there will always be a starting point , andwe can solve the sub problems directly in the order of the dependencies instead of going through therecursive calls . we do not have to follow the inductive structure , we can directly say ok , tell mewhich are all the sub problems which do not need anything solve them , which are all the ones whichdepend only on these solve them and so on . this gives as an iterative way . if we look at the subproblem for fibonacci of , for example , it says that it requires all these sub problem but thedependency is very straightforward depends on and depends on and depends onand depends on and and and have no dependencies . so , we can start at the bottom , andthen work ourselves up , we can say fibonacci of , needs no dependencies , so let me write a valuefor it . fibonacci of needs no dependency , so let me write a value for it . now we see that forfibonacci of both the things that it needs have been computed . so , i can write fib in the tabledirectly without even going to it from , i am not coming down from , we are just directly filling upthe table , just keeping track of which values depend on which values . so , assuming that we know thefunction , we can calculate this dependency and just compute that values as and when thedependencies are satisfied . now , we have and . so , we can compute fibonacci of . so , we justcompute it . we have and , so we can compute i mean and three . so , we can compute fibonacciof , so we compute . and finally , we have and fib and fib , so we can get fib . this value as youcan see becomes now a linear computation , i can just walk up from to and fill in the values . infact , this is what we do by hand . when i can you ask me for the tenth fibonacci number , i can write itout . i can say . plus is , and then plus is , plus is , , , , , , so clearly it is not avery complicated process as it seems to be when we have this exponential recursion . i can do it onthe fly more or less , because all i have to do is keep generating the values in a sequence , and this isthe virtue of dynamic programming . it converts this recursion into a kind of iterative process , whereyou fill up the values that you would normally fill up in the mem table by recursion to fill them upiteratively starting with the ones which have no dependencies . then the dynamic programmingversion of fibonacci is just this iterative blue . so , it says that you start from with value and to bethe values themselves what we earlier said was that if n is or then you return n. so , here we juststore it into the table directly we say fib table of is , fib table of is . and then we walk from ton , so in python notation the range end is n plus and at each stage , we just take the ith value to bethe sum of the i minus , i minus values which we have already computed because we are going inthis particular order because we have recognized the dependency order goes from to n. and finally ,the answer we need is the nth entry , so we just return that . to summarize , the basic idea to makena ve recursion more efficient is to never compute something twice . and to never computesomething twice , we store the values we compute in what we call a memo table this is calledmemoization . and we always look up the table before we make a recursive call . or this can be furtheroptimized , so we avoid making recursive calls altogether and we just directly fill in the table independency order which must be acyclic otherwise this sub problem will not be solvable . and thisconverts the recursive evaluation into an iterative evaluation , which is often much more efficient . inthe last lecture we looked at how to make iterative or inductive definitions more efficient than na verecursion , and we saw memoization and dynamic programming as tools to do this . now , let us lookat a typical problem and see how we can apply this technique . so , here is a problem of grid paths . so ,we have a grid here , you can imagine there are roads which are arranged in a rectangular format . wecan imagine that the intersections are numbered . so , we have , at the bottom left corner and inthis case , we have , because going across from left to right we have , , , , differentintersections and going up . so , we have at , the top right corner . if these are roads theconstraint that we have is that one can only travel up or right . so , you can go up a road or you can goright , but you can not come down . this is not allowed . these are one way roads which goes up andright , and what we want to ask is how many ways there are to go from the bottom left corner to thetop right corner . so , we want to count the number of what are called grid paths . so , a grid path is onewhich follows this right . so , we want to know how many such different paths are there which take usfrom , to , only going up or right . so , here is one path drawn in blue . here is a differentpath drawn in red and notice that these paths actually , start in different directions from the firstpoint and they never meet except with the target . they do not overlap at all . on the other hand wecould have paths which overlap . this yellow path overlaps a part of its way with the blue path in thissection and it also overlaps with the red path in portions . there are many different ways in whichwe can choose to make this up and right moves and the question is , how many total such differentpaths are there ? there is a very standard and elegant combinatorial solution . so , one way of thinkingabout this is just to determine , how many moves we have to make . we have to go from to in onedirection and to in the other direction . so , we have to make a total number of horizontalmoves and vertical moves , in other words every path no matter which direction we started andwhich move , which choice of moves we make must make steps and of these must be horizontalsteps and must be vertical steps , because they all take us from , to , . so , all we have todo since we know that these steps are horizontal and are vertical is to just demarcate whichones are horizontal and which are vertical . now once we know which ones are horizontal we knowwhat sequence they come in because the first horizontal step takes us from column to column ,second takes us from one to . so , we can not do it in any order other than that . so , we have inother words we have slots , where we can make moves and then we just say first we make an upmove , then we make a right move then we make an up move then make another up move and so on .so , every path can be drawn out like this as up moves and right moves and if we fix the rightmoves then automatically all the remaining slots must be up moves or conversely . it is eitherchoose , it is the way of choosing positions to make the right move out of the , and it turns outthat the definition of choose is clearly the same as choose because we could also fix theup moves and the definition is basically ... if you know the definitions ... then n choose k is nfactorial by k factorial into n minus k factorial . this k and n minus k basically says that minus is. so , we get a symmetric function in terms of k and n minus k. in this case we can apply thisformula if you would like to call it that and directly get that the answer is . there does notappear to be much to compute other than writing out large factorials and then seeing what thenumber comes . but the problem becomes more interesting , if we constrain it by saying that some ofthese intersections are blocked for instance , supposing there is some road work going on and wecan not go through this intersection , . this is the intersection comma second column and thefourth row counting from below . it s actually comma , but , , , yeah comma . now , if wecan not go through this then any path which goes through this particular block intersection should nolonger be counted . out to those some paths are no longer valid paths . for instance , in theearlier thing the blue path that we had drawn actually goes through this , the red path does not ,where the yellow path overlapped with the blue path unfortunately in this bad section . it also passesthrough this . there are some paths which are allowed from the and some which are not . so ,how do we determine how many paths survived this kind of block . so , again we can use acombinatorial argument in order to be blocked a path must go to , and then from , to , .if we could only count how many paths go from , to , and then how many paths go from ,to , , these are all the bad paths . so , we can count these bad paths and subtract them fromthe good paths . how do we count the bad paths well we can just solve a smaller version of theproblem . so , we have an intermediate target . so , we solve this grid how many paths go from here tohere , how many paths go from here to here . so , from , to , we get plus remember itplus it was a curve or get , plus choose . so , we get and from here to here the differenceis that we have to do in both directions and so , we have to go sorry we have to go up and wehave to go right , we are at , . so , we have to go from to and from to . so , we have pluschoose , ways of going from , to this and each of the ways in the bottom , can be combinedwith a way on the top . so , we multiply this and we get paths which pass through this badintersection , we subtract this from the original number and we get paths which remain .so , a combinatorial approach still works . now , what happens if we put such intersections ? so , wewill you can do the same thing we can count all the parts which get blocked because of the firstintersection , we can count all the paths which pass through in this case , is the secondintersection which has been blocked . so , we can count all these parts which pass through , . thiswe know how to do we just computed it for , , but the problem is that there are some paths likethe yellow paths which pass through both , and , . so , we need a third count we need tocount paths which pass through both of these and make sure we do not double count them . so , oneway is that we just add these back . this is something which is called in combinatorics inclusion andexclusion . so , when we have these overlapping exclusions , then we have to count the overlaps andinclude them back . we have to keep doing this step by step . if we have holes we get an even morecomplicated inclusion exclusion formula and it rapidly becomes very complicated even to calculatethe formula that we need to get . is there a simpler way to do this ? let us look at the inductivestructure of the problem , suppose we say we want to get in one step to intersection i , j . how canwe reach this in one step since our roads only go left to right and bottom to top , the only way we canreach i , j is by taking a right edge from it s left neighbor . so , we can go from i , j to i , j or we cango from below from i , j to i , j . notice that if a path comes from the left it must be different froma path that comes from below . so , every path that comes from the left is different from every paththat comes from below . so , we can just add these up . in other words if we say that paths i , j is thequantity we want to compute , we want to count the number of paths from , to i , j . these pathsmust break up into disjoint sets those which come from the left which recursively or inductively ifyou prefer to say is exactly the quantity paths i , j . how many paths are there which reach i , jevery one of these paths can be extended by a right edge to reach i , j and , they will all be differentsimilarly paths i , j are all those paths which come from below , because they all reach the point justbelow i , j from there each of them will be extended in a unique way to i , j this gives us our simpleinductive formula , paths i , j is just the sum of paths i , j and paths i , j . then we need to ofcourse , investigate the base cases in this case the real base case is just paths , in how manyways can i go from , and just stay in , ? well there is only one way , it is tempting to sayways , but it is not ways its one way otherwise nothing will happen . so , we have one way by justdoing nothing to stay in , and if we are now moving along the left column , if you are movingalong the left column then there are no paths coming from its left because we are already on theleftmost column . so , all the paths to , j must be extensions of paths which have come from belowup to , j . similarly if you are on the bottom row there is no way to come from below because weare already on the lowest set of roads . so , paths i , can only come from the left , from paths i , .this gives us a direct way to actually compute this even with holes because , the only difference nowis that if , there is a hole we just declare that no paths can reach that place . so , we just add an extraclause which says paths i , j is if there is a hole at i , j otherwise we use exactly the same inductiveformulation and now what happens is , if i have a hole below me , if i have a hole below me , no pathscan come from that direction because by definition paths i , j at that point is . so , once again if wenow apply this and do this using the standard translation from the inductive definition to a recursiveprogram , we will find that we will wastefully recompute the same quantity multiple times forinstance paths , . if we have paths , , it will require me to compute this and this . these arethe sub problems for paths , , namely , and , but , in turn in order to compute ,i will have to compute whatever is to its left and below it and in order to compute , i will alsohave to compute what is to its left and below it and now what we find is that this quantity namely ,is computed twice , once because of the left neighbor of , and once because of the neighborbelow , . so , as we saw before we could use memoization to make sure that we never computei , j twice by storing a table i comma j , and every time we compute a new value for i comma j westore it in the table and every time we look up , we need to compute one we first check the table , if itis already there we look it up , otherwise we will compute it and store it , but since we know there is atable and we know what the table structure is basically it is all entries of the form i comma j. we canalso see if we can fill up this table iteratively by just examining the sub problems in terms of theirdependencies . in general a node the value depends on things to it left and below . if there are nodependencies , it must have nothing to its left and nothing below and there is only one such pointnamely , . this is the only point which is the base case which has nothing to its left and nothingbelow so its value is directly read . so , we start from here . remember that the base value at , isone , and now once we have done this it turns out you remember the road dependency , it said i ,is i , . so , we can fill up this , because this has only one dependency which is known now . in thisway i can fill up the entire row and say that all along this row there is only one path namely the paththat starts going right and keeps going right . now we can go up and see that this thing is also knownbecause , it also depends only on the value below it and once that is known then these are known .so i can add them up remember the value at any position is just the value to its left plus the value toits bottom and now i start to get some non trivial values , and in this way i can fill up this table row byrow and at each point when i come to something i will get the fact with the dependency unknown .the next row looks like this and the next row . now we come to the row with holes . so , for the rowwith holes , wherever we hit a hole instead of writing the value that we would normally get by addingits left and bottom neighbour we deliberately put a because that means , that no path is actuallyallowed propagating through that row . now , when we come to the next row , the holes willautomatically block the paths coming from the wrong direction . so , here for instance we have onlypaths coming from the left because we have no paths coming from below similarly we have pathscoming from the left and no paths coming from below . this is how our inductive definition neatlyallows us to deal with holes and from that inductive definition we recognize the dependencystructure and we imagine the memo table and now we are filling up this memo table row by row sothat at every point when we reach an i , j value its dependent values are already known . so , we cancontinue doing this row by row , and eventually we find look there are paths which avoid thesetwo . so , we could also do the same thing in a different way instead of doing the bottom row , we cando the left column and the same logic says , that we can go all the way up then we can start in thesecond column , go all the way up and do this column by column and not unexpectedly , we should getthe same answer . there is a third way to do this . so , once we have one at , then we can fill boththe first element above it and the first element to its right . so , we can do this diagonal , now noticethat any diagonal value like this one has both its entries . this has only one entry , this also . so i cannow fill up this diagonal . i can go one more diagonal , then i can go one more diagonal . so , we canalso fill up this thing diagonal by diagonal . the dependency structure may not require us to fill it in aparticular way we might have very different ways to fill it up , all we want to do is systematically fill upthis table in an iterative fashion not recursively we do not want to call f of i , j and then look at f of iminus , j. we want to directly say when we reach i , j we have the values we need , but the valueswe need could come in multiple different orders . so , we could have done it row wise , we could havedone it column wise and here you see we can do it diagonally , but it does not matter so long as weactually get all the values that we need . so , one small point , so we have said that we can usememoization or we can use dynamic programming . one of the advantages of using dynamicprogramming is it avoids this recursive call . so , recursion we had mentioned earlier , also in someearlier lecture , comes with a price because whenever you make a recursive call , you have to suspenda computation , store some values , restore those values . there is a kind of administrative cost withrecursion . so , actually though it looks like only a single operation and we call fib of n minus or fib ofn minus . there is actually a cost involved with suspending this operation , going there and comingback . so , saving on recursion is one important reason to move from memoization to dynamicprogramming , but what dynamic programming does is to evaluate every value regardless of whetherits going to be useful for the final answer or not . in the grid path thing there is one situation whereyou can illustrate this . imagine that we have these obstacles placed exactly one step inside theboundary . now , if we want to reach this its very clear that i can only come all the way along the toprow or all the way up the rightmost column , there is no other way i can reach them . so , anythingwhich is inside this these positions there is no way to go from here out . there is no point in countingall these values . we have this region which is in the shadow of these obstacles which can never reachthe final thing . so , when we do memoization when we come back and recursively explore it willnever ask us to come here because it will never pass these boundaries . on the other hand ourdynamic programming will blindly walk through everything . so , it will do row by row , column bycolumn and it will eventually find the s , but it will fill the entire n by n grid . in this case how manywill memoization do ? it will do basically only the boundary . it will do only order m n. so , we have amemo table which has only a linear number of entries in terms of the rows and columns and adynamic programming entry , which is quadratic if both were n it will be n squared , thus is n. thissuggests that dynamic programming in this case , is wastefully computing a vast number of entries . son squared is much larger than n remember . it will take us enormous amount of time to compute it ,if we just count the cost per entry , but the flip side is that each entry that we need to add to thememo table requires one recursive call . the reality is that these recursive calls will typically cost youmuch more , than the wastefulness of computing the entire table . in general even though you cananalyze the problem and decide that memoization will result in many fewer new values beingcomputed than dynamic programming . it is usually sound to just use dynamic programming as thedefault way to do the computation . as a final example of a user defined data structure we will look atbinary search keys . we are looking at a situation where we need to maintain dynamic data in asorted manner , remember that one of the byproducts of sorting is that we can use binary search toefficiently search for a value , but binary search can be used if we can sort data once and for all andkeep it in sorted order if the data is changing dynamically then in order to exploit binary search willhave to keep resorting the data which is not efficient . supposing , we have a sequence of items anditems are periodically being inserted and deleted now as we saw with heaps , for instance , if we try tomaintain a sorted list and then keep track of inserts then each insert or delete , in this case wouldtake order and time and that would also be expensive . however , it turns out that we can move to atree like structure or a tree structure like in a priority queue it move to a heap and then do insert anddelete also efficiently alongside searching . the data structure we have in mind is called a binarysearch tree . so , in a binary search tree we keep exactly one copy of every value . it is like a set we donot keep duplicates and the values are organized as follows for every node all values which aresmaller than the current nodes value are to the left and all values that are bigger than the currentnode value are to the right . here is an example of a binary search tree , you can check for instancethat to the left of the root , we have all values , and which are smaller than and to the rightof we have the values and which are bigger , now this is a recursive property . if you go down , forinstance , if you look at the node label two then below it has values and since is smaller than ,is to the left of and since is bigger than , is to the right of . similarly , if we look at the node, it has only one value below it namely and therefore , it has no left child , but is in the rightsubtree of . we can maintain a binary search tree using nodes exactly like we did for a user definedlists except in a list we had a value and a next pointer in a binary search tree we have two valuesbelow each node potentially a left child and a right child . so , each node now consist of three itemsthe value being stored the left child and the right child . if we look at the same example that we hadon the right then the root node will have a pointer to the nodes with and , the node will havea pointer to the nodes and , these are now what are called leaf nodes . so , they have no children .their left and right pointers will be none indicating there is nothing in that direction . similarly , hasgot none as his left pointer because it has no left child and the right pointer points to and the nodewith nine again has two none pointers because it is a leaf node . now , it will turn out that we willwant to expand this representation in order to exploit it better for recursive presentations . so , whatwe will do is that we will not just terminate the tree with the value and the two pointers none youwill actually add a layer of empty nodes with all fields none with this the empty tree will be a singleempty node and a leaf node that is not none will have a value and both it is children will be emptynodes . it would not directly have none as it is left and right pointers it will actually help childrenwhich are empty . so , this makes it easier to write recursive functions and if we do not do this then itis a bit harder to directly implement recursive functions . just to understand how our tree structurechanges this is the structure that we had before the same example . here , notice that in the leafnodes the leaf nodes have a value and both the child pointers left and right are directly none . so , wewant to change this , what we want to do is to we want to insert below this an empty node ateverywhere , where we see none , we want to insert and extract the node . this of course , grows upthe tree a little bit , but then this cost is not that much as we will as you can calculate . so , if we dothis then we get a new tree which looks like this right below every leaf node wherever we normallyhad a none pointer indicating that the path has ended we will explicitly add one extra node whichhas all three fields none and it will turn out that this is very useful to clean up our programming lateron . so , this is a representation that we will use for a binary search tree each node has three pointersand at the leaf s we have an extra layer of empty nodes with all three values none , none , none . hereis the basic class tree . so , as before we have an init function which takes an initial values which is bydefault none . the init function works as follows right , we first setup the value to be initval whichcould be none if there is a value , then we create an tree with one node in which case we have tocreate these empty nodes . now , notice that if we go back and we go do not give a values . so , maybeit is better to look at this case right if we do not give a value then we end up with a tree we just saysnone , none , none . so , this is our empty . the initial value is none we get this tree if the init value isnot none then we get a tree in which we put the value v and then we make the left in the rightpointers both point to this none , none . so , this is a tree that will contain exactly one value . so ,depending on that the init values none or not none we end up either a tree with three nodes withtwo dummy nodes below or a single empty node denoting the empty tree . so , given this as beforewe have the function isempty which basically checks if the value is none , if i start looking at a treeand the very first node says none then that tree is empty otherwise it is not empty . let us first look ata way to systematically explore the values in a tree . these are called traversals and one traversalwhich is very useful for a binary search tree is an inorder traversal . so , what an inorder traversal doesis that it first explores the left side . so , it will first explore this recursively again using an inordertraversal then it will display this and then it will explore the right . if you see the code you can seethat if the tree is not empty you first do an inorder traversal of the left self tree then you pick up thevalue at the current node and then you do an inorder traversal of the right self tree and thisproduces the list of values . so , if we execute this step by step , if we reach it says first do an inordertraversal of the left . we come down to two this is again not at a trivial tree . so , again we have to do ainorder traversal . so , we go it is left and now when we have one and inorder traversal of one consistsof it is left child which is empty one and then it is right child is empty . so , this produces one now icome back and i list out the node two and now i do an inorder traversal of it is right . so , i have got ,, . so , this completes inorder traversal of the left subtree of . now , i list out itself and then i doan inorder traversal of and since has no left child the next values are comes out as a itself andthen . so , what you can see is that since we print out the values on the left child before the currentvalue when the value is the right child after the current value with respect to the current value allthese values are sorted because that is how the search key is organized and since is recursively doneat every level down the final output of a inorder traversal of a search tree is always a sorted list . thisis one way to ensure that the tree that you have constructed is sorted you do an inorder sub traversalthat the key of constructed is a search tree you do an inorder traversal and ensure that the outputthat you get from this traversal is a sorted list . as we mentioned that the beginning of this lecture ,one of the main reasons to construct a search tree is to be able to do something like binary searchand this is with dynamic data . so , we will also have insert and delete as operations , but the mainfundamental operation is find . like in binary search we start at the root . so , you imagine that this isthe middle of an list of an array , for example , we look at this element if we have found it it is fine ifwe have not found it then we need to look in the appropriate sub tree since the search tree isorganized with the left values smaller in the right value is bigger we go left if the value we weresearching for is smaller than the current node and we go right if it is larger than the current node . so ,this is very much a generalization of binary search in the tree . here is the code , it is very straightforward we want to find value of v remember , this is this python syntax . we always have the self asthe first parameter to our function . so , if the current node is empty we can not find it . so , it is vreturn false if we do find v then we return true and if we do not find v then if it is . this is not , itshould be self if it is smaller than this current value then we go left and search for it otherwise we goright and search for it . so , this is exactly a binary search and it is a very simple recursive thing whichexactly follows a structure of a search tree . it will be useful later on to be able to find the smallestand largest values in a search tree . so , notice that as we keep going left we go smaller and smaller .so , where is the minimum value in a tree it is along the smaller left most path . so , if i have to go fromthe left most path and if i can not go any further then i find it . so , we will always apply this functiononly when tree is non empty . let us assume that we are looking for the minimum value in a nonempty tree . well , we find the left most path . if i can not go further left then i found it . in this case , if ireach one since i can not go further one is the minimum value otherwise if i can go left then i will goone more step . so , if we start this , for instance , say it will say that have left a subtree . so , theminimum value below is the minimum value below it is left child . so , you go to three now we saythat the minimum value below three is the minimum value below it is left child . so , you go to onethen we say that the minimum value is the minimum value at because there is no left child andtherefore , we get the answer and it is indeed that anything below that is only on the right that is. dually , one can find the maximum value by following the right most path right , if the right is nonethen we return the current value otherwise we recursively look for the maximum value to our right .in this case we start at , we go down to , then we go down to and since there is no further rightpath from , must be the maximum value in this tree . we will come back later on and see why weneed this minimum and maximum value , but any way it is useful thing to be able to find and it is veryeasy to do , again using the structure of the binary search . so , one of the things we said is that weneed to be able to dynamically add and remove elements from the tree . the first function that welook for is insert , how do we insert an element in the tree well it is quite easy we look for it if we donot find it then the place where are search concludes is exactly where it should have been . so , weinsert it at that point right . for example , supposing we try to insert in this tree , when we look atand when go left when we go left then we come to again and we go right then we come to ,and we find that we have exhausted this path and there is no possible in this tree , but had wefound it should be to the left of . so , we insert it there . so , we look for where it should find itand if we do not find it we insert it with the appropriate place . similarly , you can start and look for. so , is bigger than . so , we go over right then it is smaller than . so , we go left , but there isnothing to the left . so , we out it to the left of . now , insert will not put in a value that is alreadythere because we have no duplicates . so , if now we try to for instance insert ninety one then we goright from we go right from and now we find that is already present in the tree . so , insertninety one has no effect on this tree . this is a very simple modification of the find algorithm . so , wekeep searching and if we reach the leaf node then we come to an empty node right . if you find thatwe have reached an empty node then we do the equivalent of creating a new node here we set thisvalue to be v and we create a new frontier below by adding two empty nodes in the left and rightrather than just having none . on the other hand , if we find the value in the tree we do nothing and ifwe do not find the value then we just use the search tree property and try to insert either on the leftor on the right as appropriate . how about delete . so , delete is a little bit more complicated thaninsert . so , basically whenever we find v in the tree and that can only be one v remember this is notlike deleting from the list that we had before where we were removing the first copy of v in a searchtree we have only one copy of every value if at all . if we find v we must delete it . so , we search for vas usual now if the node that we are searching for is a leaf then we are done we just delete it andnothing happens , if it has only one child then we can promote child . if it has two children we have ahole we have a leaf we have a node which we have to remove value , but we have values on bothsides below it and now we will use this maximum function maxval or minval in order to do the work .let us just see how this works through some examples right . so , supposing we first delete then wefirst search for , we find it since it is a leaf then we are in this case the first case we just i have toremove this leaf and we are done . now , we try to delete . so , we find and we find that it hasonly one child . so , if it has only one child then we move this out then we can just effectively shortcircuit this link and move this whole thing up and make point to directly . so , we are in thissecond case this is what it means to promote the child . so , the deleted node has only one child wecan bypass the child and directly connect the parent of the deleted node to the one child of thedeleted node . so , this will result in moving up there . now , finally , we have the difficult case whichis you want to delete a node which is in the middle of the tree , in case this case . so , we come toand we want to remove this . now , if we remove this there will be a vacancy now , what do we fillthe vacancy again and how do we adjust the shape of the tree . so , we look to the left and find themaximum value remember that everything to the left is smaller than and everything to the right isbigger than . so , among the left nodes we take the biggest one and we move it there theneverything to the left will remain smaller than that node you could also do it the other way and takethe smallest values from the right , but you would not do that you will stick to taking the maximumvalue from the left . we go to the left and find the maximum value is . so , basically we have takenthis and moving it up there now , we should not have two copies of . so , we need to remove this. so , how do we do that well within this subtree , we delete now this looks like a problembecause in order to delete a node we are again deleting a node , remember that the way that themaximum value was defined it is along with the right most path . so , the right most path will eitherend in leaf or it will end in the node like this which has only one child and we know that when wehave a leaf or only one child we are in the first two cases which we can handle without doing thismaximum value that . so , we can just walked out remove the and promote the . so , this isexactly how delete works . we can now look at the function . if there is no value v then we just returnthe easy cases are when we do not find we are the current thing . so , if it is less than the currentvalue then we go to the left and delete if it is bigger than the current value we go to the right anddelete . so , the hard work comes then we actually find v at the current value . if this is a leaf now wehave not shown , how write this function if this is a leaf this means that it has left and right child bothas empty nodes if this is a leaf then we will make it empty we will see how we do this in a minute iwill just show you the code for this . so , if this is a leaf we delete it right this is the first case is simplecase this is the leaf we just delete it and we make this node empty if on the other hand it has onlyone child , if . so , actually in this case if the left is empty then we just promote the right and if it is leftis not empty then we will copy the maximum value from the left and delete the maximum value onthe left . we need to just see these two functions here make empty and copy right . so , make emptyjust says convert this into an empty node an empty node is one which all three fields are none . so ,we will just say self dot value is none self dot left is none self dot right is none . if it had an emptynode hanging of it those empty nodes are now disconnected from return . this is this make emptyfunction and now the copy right function just takes everything from the right and moves it up . ittakes the right value and makes it the current value the left value right dot left and makes with theleft . so , we just take basically this node and copy these values one by one here . so , we copy right dotvalue to the current value right dot left to the current left right dot right to the current right . so , howmuch time do all these take well if you examined the thing carefully you would realize that in everycase we are just walking down one path searching for the value and along that path either we find itor we go down to the end and then we stop . so , the complexity of every operation is actually writtenby the height of the tree if we have a balanced tree a balanced tree is one where you can define thateach time we come to a node the left in the right chair roughly have the same size . if we have abalanced tree then it is not difficult to see then we have height logarithmic in an this is like a heap aheap is an example of a balanced tree now search tree will not be has nicely subset of heap becausewe will have some holes , but we will have a logarithmic height in general we will not explain how tobalance a tree in this particular course we can look it up you can look for topic called avl trees whichis one variety of balanced trees which are balanced by rotating sub trees . so , it is possible whiledoing insert and delete to maintain balance at every node and ensure that all these operations arelogarithmic . let us just look at the code directly and execute it and convenience ourselves that all thethings that we wrote here actually work as intended . here we have a python code for the class treethat we showed in the lectures . so , we are just added a comment about how the empty node isorganized and the leaves are organized . so , there is the constructor which sets up either an emptynode or a leaf node with two empty children then we have isempty and iseleaf we check whetherthe current value is none or both the left and right children are empty , respectively . then we havethis function makeempty which converts the leaf to an empty node copyright , copies a right childvalues to the current node and then we have the basic recursive functions . so , we start with find . so ,find is the one which is equivalent to binary search then insert is like find and there it where it doesnot find it tries to insert . and finally , we have maxval which we made for delete and delete nowwhen we reach the situation where we are found a value to that needs to be deleted if it is a leafthen we remove the leaf and make it empty if it is the left child is empty then we copy the right childup otherwise we delete the maximum from the left and promote that maximum value to a current .finally , we have this inorder traversal which generates a sorted list from the tree values and the strfunction just displays the inorder traversal . now if we go to this then we can for instance import thispackage set up an empty tree and then put in some random values it is important not put in sortedorder , otherwise a sorted tree if you just insert one at a time it will just generate one long path . so , iam just trying to put it in some random order . we insert into the tree all these values and now weare print t give me a sorted version of this . so , , , , , i can now insert more values . so , i can forrandom insert and verify that now is there before and and i can keep doing this , i caninsert i can even insert values in between like . because i have not in specified the integers right .so , it puts a between and and so on and now i can delete , for example if i delete then i find thati have , , . if i delete , for example , then i have no longer between and and so on . thisincrementation definitely works , although we have a balanced it . if we do not balance it then thedanger is that if we keep inserting and sorted sequence then we keep inserting larger values it keepsadding on the right child . so , the tree actually looks like a long path right . then it becomes like asorted list and every insert will take order n time , but if we do have rotations built in as we do , wecould be using an avl tree then we can ensure that the tree never grows to height more than log n .so , all the operations insert , find and delete they always be logarithmic respect to the number ofvalues currently being maintained . now that we have seen the basics about how to define classesand objects , let us define an interesting data structure . suppose we want to implement our ownversion of the list , a list is basically a sequence of nodes and each node in the sequence stores avalue and points to the next node . so , in order to go through the list we have to start at thebeginning and walk following these pointers till we reach the last pointer which points to nothing .we have a list of the form v , v , v , v in python notation . then this is how we would imagine it isactually represented . there are nodes . the list l itself which we have set up points to the first nodein this list , v points to v , v points to v and v points to be v . the final node points to nothingand that indicates we have reached the end of the list . in this representation what would the emptylist look like well it is natural to assume that the empty list will consist of a single node which hasboth the value and the next node pointers set to none , whereas for instance the singleton would bea single node in which we have the value v and the next set to none . so , this is the convention thatwe shall follow for our representation of a list . so , notice that unless we have an empty list with asingle node none , none no other node in a list can have value none , right . this is something that wewill implicitly assume and use that checking for the value none will tell us it is an empty list and wewill never find none in the middle of a list . we distinguish between a singleton and an empty listpurely based on the value . both of them consist of a single node . now the reason that we have to dothis is because actually python does not allow us to create an empty list if we say something like l isequal to none and we want this to denote the empty list the problem is that none does not have atype as far as python s value system is concerned . so , once we have none , we can not apply theobject functions we are going to create for this list type . so , we need to create something which isempty of the correct type . so , we need to create at least node and that is why we need to use thiskind of representation in order to denote an empty list . here is the basic class that we are going touse , it is a class node . so , inside each node we have attributes value and next as we said andremember that self is always used with every function to denote the object under consideration . wewill use this default scheme that if we do not say anything we create an empty list . the init value , thisshould be init val . the initial value is by default none unless i provide you an initial value in whichcase you create a list with that value and because of our assumption about empty list all we need todo to check whether a list is empty is to check whether the value at the initial node is none or not .we just take the list we are pointing to and look at the very first value which will be self dot valueand ask whether it is none . if it is none , it is empty . if it is not none , it is not empty . here is a typicalthing . we say l is equal to node this creates an empty list because it is not provided any value . so ,the default initial value is going to be none . if i say l is equal to node this will create a node withthe value . it will create the singleton list that we would normally write in python like this . if i askwhether l is empty , the answer will be true . if i ask whether l is empty , the answer will be falsebecause self dot value is not none . now , once we have a list what we would like to do is manipulateit . the first thing that we might want to do is add a value at the end of the list . if the list is alreadyempty , then we have a single node which has value none and we want to make it a singleton node , asingleton list with value v. so , we want to go from this to this , remember that in a singleton node wejust have instead of none we have the value v over here so that is all we need to do . we need to justreplace the none by v , if we are at the last element of the list and we know that we are at the lastelement of the list because the next value is none then what we need to do is create a new value .we walk to the end of the list and then we reach none . now , we create a new element here with thevalue v and we make this element point to this , we create a new element with the node v and set thenext field of the last node to point to the new node and if this is not the last value then well we canjust recursively say to the rest of the list treat this as a new list starting at the next element , take thenext element and recursively append v to that . this gives us a very simple recursive definition ofappend . so , we take append and we want to append v to this list . if it is empty , then we just set thevalue to v. so , this just converts the single node with value none to the single node with value of v ,otherwise if we are at the last node that is self dot next is none then we create a new node with thevalue v and we set our next pointer to point at the new node , remember when we create a newnode the new node automatically is created by our init function with next none . we would nowcreate a new node which looks like v and none and we will set our next pointer to point to it and thefinal thing is that if it is not none then we have something else after us . so , we go that next elementself dot next and with respect to that next element we reapply the append function with the value v ,this is the recursive call . we have been abundantly careful in making sure that this is parsable . so , wehave put this bracket saying that we take the object self dot next and apply append to that actuallypython will do this correctly . we need not actually put the bracket , we can just write self dot next dotappend v and python will correctly bracket this as self dot next dot append . so , this dot is taken fromthe right . now , instead of recursively going to the end of the list we can also scan the end of the listtill the end iteratively . we can write a loop which keeps traversing these pointers until we reach anode whose next is none . if the list is empty as before we replace the value none by v , otherwise wescan the list till we reach the last element and then once we reach the last element as in the earliercase we create a new node and make the last element point to it . this gives us an append which isiterative . so , we call it append i just to indicate that it is iterative . the first part is the same if thecurrent list is empty then we just set the value to be v and we return , otherwise we now want towalk down the list . we set up a temporary pointer to point to the current node that we are at and solong as the next is none we keep shifting temp to the next value . so , we just write a loop which sayswhile temp dot next is not none just keep going from temp to temp dot next . so , just keep shiftingtemp . finally when we come out of this loop at this point we know that temp dot next is none . this isthe condition under which we exit the loop . we have reached , the node temp is now pointing to thelast node in the current list . at this point we do exactly what we did in the recursive case we create anew node with a value v and we make this last node point to this new node . so , we reset next oftemp from none to the new node . what if we do not want to append , but we want to insert . now itlooks normally that insert should be easier that append , but actually insert is a bit tricky . so , by insertwe mean that we want to put a value at the beginning . we want to put a node here which has v andmake this pointer . this is what we want to do now . the problem with this really is that after wecreate a new node we can not make this point here and this point here there is no problem in makingthe new node point to v , but if we reassign the value of l or inside a object if we reassign the valueof self then this creates a completely different object . we saw this when we were looking at howparameters are passed and immutable value are passed . we said that if we pass a mutable value to afunction so long as we do not reassign that thing any mutation inside the function will be reflectedoutside the function , but if we reassign to the list or dictionary inside the function we get a new copyand then after that any change we make is off . so same way if we reassign l or self to point to a newnode then we will lose the connection between the parameter we passed to the function and theparameter we get back . so , we must be careful not to make l point to this thing . we can not changewhere l points to . so , how do we get around this problem ? we have created a new node , we want tomake l point to it , but we are not allowed to do so , because if we do so , then python will disconnectthe new l from the old l. so , there is a very simple trick . what we do is we do not change the identityof the node , we change what it contains . so , we know now that v is the old first node and v is anew first node , but we can not make l point to the new first node , so we exchange the values . so ,what we do is we replace v by v and v by v . now , the values are swapped and we also have to doa similar thing for what is pointing where . so , l is now pointing to v as the first node , but now wehave bypassed v which is a mistake . we must now make the first node point to the new node andthe new node point to the old second node . so , by doing this kind of plumbing what we haveensured is that the new list looks like we have inserted v before the v , but actually we have inserteda new node in between v and v and we have just changed the links to make it appear as though thenew node is second and not first . here is the code for insert . as usual , if you have an empty list insertis easy . we just have to change none to v. so , insert and append both behave the same way with anempty list . we go from the empty list to the list v. it does not matter whether you are inserting orappending . otherwise , we create this new node and then we do this swapping of values between thecurrent node that self is pointing to , that is the head of the list and the new node . we exchange thevalues we set self dot value to new node dot value and simultaneously new node dot value to selfdot value using this python simultaneous assignment . and similarly we take self dot next which waspointing to the next node and make it point to the new node and the new node instead should pointto what we were pointing to earlier . so , new node dot next is self dot next . this is how we insert andinsert as we saw is a little bit more complicated than append because of having to handle the initialway in which l points to the list or self points to the list . what if we want to delete a node ? how dowe specify to delete a node ? well we specify it by a value , but let us just suppose you want to deletesay the second node in this list . now , how would we delete it ? well again just as we did insert wewould do some re plumbing or re connection . so , we take the node that we want to delete and wejust make the link that points to v bypass it . so , we take the link from v and make it directly pointto v . so , in essense , all that delete requires us to do is to reassign the pointer from before thedeleted node with the pointer after the deleted node . it actually does not physically remove thatobject from memory , but it just makes it inaccessible from the link end . we provide a value v and wewant to remove the first occurrence of v. we scan the list for the first v. now notice that in thisplumbing procedure we need to be at v in order to make it point to v . if we wanted to delete thenext node then we are in good shape because we can take the next dot next and assign it to thecurrent next . so , we should look step ahead . if you are already at v then we have gone past vand we can not go back to v , easily the way we have set up our list because it only goes forward wecan not go back to v and change it . what we will actually do is we will scan by looking at the nextvalue . if the self dot next dot value is v that is if the next node is to be deleted then we bypass it bysaying the current node s next is not the next node that we had , but the next node s next . so , self dotnext is reassigned to self dot next dot next bypass the next node . as before like with insert the onlything we have to be careful about is if we have to delete actually the first value in the list . if you wantto delete the first value in the list exactly like we had with insert the natural thing would be to , nowsay that l should point to the second value in the list , but we can not point l there because if wereassign the node that l points to then it will create a new object and it will break the connectionbetween the parameter we passed and the thing we get back . we use the same trick . what we do iswe copy the value v from the next node and then ... so we just copy this value from here to hereand then we delete v . so , we wanted to delete the first node , we are not allowed to delete the firstnode because we can not change what l points to . so , instead we take the value in the second nodewhich was v , copy it here and then pretend we deleted v by making the first node point to thethird . here is a part of the delete function . first of all , if we were looking for v and then we do notfind it . so , sorry in this code , it is called x. so , this is deleting value x if you want . if we say that the listis empty , then obviously , we can not delete it because delete says if there is a value of this ... nodewith value x then delete it . if it is empty we do nothing otherwise if this self dot value is x the firstnode is to be deleted . then if there is only node , then we are going from x to empty , this is easy . ifthere is no next node right , if we have only a singleton then we just set the value to be none and weare done . this is the easy case , but if it is not the first node , i mean , it is the first node and this is notalso the only node in the list then what we do is we do what we said before . we copy the next value .we pretend that we are deleting the second node . so , we copy the second value into the first valueand we delete the next node by bypassing . this is that bypass . this is part of the function this is thetricky part which is how do you delete the first value . if it is only value , make it none if not , bypassthe second node by copying the second node to the first node . and if this is not the case then we justwalk down and find the first x to delete . we start as this is like our iterative append . we startpointing to self and so long as we have not reached the end of the list if we find the next value is xand then we bypass it and if you reach the end of the list , we have not found it , we do nothing , wejust have to return . in this case it is not like append where when we reached the end of the list wehave to append here , if we do not find a next by the time we reach the end of the list , then there snothing to be done . so , just for completeness , here is the full function , this was the first slide we sawwhich is the case when the value to be deleted is in the first node and this is the second case whenwe walk down the list looking for the first x to delete . just like append can be done both iterativelyand recursively , we can also delete recursively which is if it is the first node we handle it in a specialway by moving the second value to the first and bypassing it as we did before . otherwise we justpoint to the next node and ask the next node , the list starting at the next node , what is normallycalled the tail of the list , to delete v from itself . the only thing that we have to remember in this isthat if we reach the end of the list and we delete the last node . supposing it turns out , the value v tobe deleted is here . so , we come here and then we delete it . what we will end up with is finding avalue none , because when we delete it from here , it is as though we take a singleton element v anddelete v from a singleton and will create none none . so , this is the base case , if we are recursivelydeleting as we go whenever we delete from the last node , it is as though we are deleting from asingleton list with value v and we are not allowed to create a value none at the end . we have to justcheck when we create the next thing if we delete the next value and it is value becomes none thenwe should remove that item from the list . so , this is the only tricky thing that when we do a recursivedelete you have to be careful after we delete you have to check what is happening . this part is theearlier part and now this is recursive part . so , recursive part is fairly straight forward . so the first partis when we delete the first element from a list , but the recursive part we check if self dot next isequal to none then we delete recursively that is fine . so , this is the delete call . now , after the deleteis completed we check whether the next value has actually become none . have we actually ended upat the last node and deleted the last node ? if so , then we remove it , this we can either write self dotnext is equal to self dot next dot next or we could even just write self dot next is equal to none whichis probably a cleaner way of saying it because it can only happen at the last node . so , you make thisnode the last node . remember if the next node is none , it s next must also be none . this has thesame effect self dot next dot next must be none . so , we can also directly assign self dot next is equalnone and it would basically make this node the last node . the only thing to remember aboutrecursive delete is when we reach the end of the list and we have deleted this list this becomes nonethen we should terminate the list here and remove this node . finally let us write a function to printout a list . so , that we can keep track of what is going on . we will print out a list by just constructing apython list out of it and then using str on the python list . so , we want to create a python list from thevalues in our list . so , we first initialize our list that we are going to produce for the empty list . if ourlist , the node itself has nothing then we return the string value of the empty list , otherwise we walkdown the list and we keep adding each value using the append function . so , we keep appending eachvalue that we have stored in each node building up a python list in this process and finally , we returnwhatever is the string value of that list . let us look at some python code and see how this actuallyworks . here we have code which exactly reflects what we did in the slides . we have chosen to usethe recursive versions for both append and delete . so , we start with this initial initialization whichsets the initial value to be none by default or otherwise v as an argument provided . then isemptyjust checks whether self dot value is none , we had written a more compact form in the slide bysaying just return self dot value equal to equal to none , but we have expanded it out as an ifstatement here . now , this is the append function . so , append just checks if the current node is emptythen it puts it here otherwise it creates a new node ... if we have reached the last node it creates anew node and makes the last node point to the new node , otherwise it recursively appends . then wehave this insert function here . this insert function again if it is empty then it just creates a singletonlist otherwise it creates a new node and exchanges the first node and the new node . so , thisparticular thing here is the place where we create this , swap the pointers so that what self points todoes not change , but rather we create a reordering of the new node and the first node . so , the newnode becomes the second node and the first node now has the value that we just added . finally , wecan come down to the recursive delete . so , the recursive delete again says that if the list is emptythen we do nothing , otherwise if the first value is to be deleted then we have to be careful and wehave to make sure we delete the second value by actually copying the second node into the first andfinally , if that is not the case then we just recursively delete , but then when we finish the delete , wehave to delete the spurious empty node at the end of the list in case we have accidentally created it .so , these lines here just make sure that we do not leave a spurious empty node at the end of thelist . and finally , we have this str function which creates a python list from our values and eventuallyreturns a string representation of that list . if we now run this by importing , then we could say , forinstance , that l is a list with value and if we say print l then we will get this representation , wecould for instance put this in a loop and say for i in range say , l dot append i. and then if we atthis point print l then we get to as before . now we say l dot delete for instance and we print lthen is formed and so on . if we say l dot insert and print l , then will begin . so , you can checkthat this works . notice that we are getting these empty brackets , this is the returned value . so , whenwe wrote this return , we wrote with the empty argument . and then we get this empty tuple , we canjust write a return with nothing and then it would not display this funnier return value , but what isactually important is that the internal representation of our list is correctly changing with thefunctions that we have written . in the lecture , we saw that in object oriented programming wedefine a data type through a template called a class , which defines the internal data implementation ,and the functions that we use to manipulate the data type . and then we create instances of this datatype as objects . we saw a skeleton implementation of a heap . this had a special function called init ,which was used to create the heap , and then we had functions insert and delete . now one thingwhich we did not explain is this argument self that run through this . this is a convention which wehave in python that every function defined inside a class should have as its first parameter the nameself , now it need not be called self , but it is less confusing to always call it , self . let us just assumethat this parameter is always there and it is called self . now , what is self , self is a name that is usedinside the class to refer to the object that we are currently looking at . for instance , if we are dealingwith this heap h , when we say h dot insert then this insert is using the value . so , is the value xwhich is being passed to insert , and h is the value on which the should be added and that is aname for self . so , self in other words , tells the function which object it is operating on itself . it is aname to itself because you are telling a function an object heap h insert into your self . in thatsense , my values are denoted by self and inside a heap , it can may be refer to other heaps . we willsee a little later that we can take one value and refer to another value . there will be my values andthere will be other values . so , my values are always implicitly called self , because that is the one thatis typically manipulated by a function . to make this a little clearer , let us look at a slightly simplerexample than heaps to get all the notations and the terminology correct for us . our first example isjust a representation of a point x y. so , we are just thinking about a normal coordinate system , wherewe have the x axis , the y axis . therefore , a given point is given some coordinate like a comma b. thisis a point with x coordinate a and y coordinate b , this is a familiar concept that all of you must haveseen in mathematics somehow . so , we want to associate with such an object two quantities the xcoordinate and the y coordinate and this is set up by the init function by passing the values a and bthat you want point to have . and now we have within the point , we have these two attributes x andy , means every point looks like this . it has an x value and a y value , and this x value is something andthe y value is something . and if we change this x and y value , then the point shifts around from oneplace to another . now , in order to designate that the x and y belong to this point and no other , weprefix it by self . so , self dot x refers to the x value within this point myself , self dot y is y value withinmyself . if you have a generic point p then we have p dot x , p dot y these will refer to the values x andy the names x and y associated with the point p. inside the class definition , self refers to the value ofthe attribute or the name within this particular object . now this particular object changes as wemove from one object to another , but for every object self is itself . so , for p if i tell somethingabout p well in the context of p self is p . if i have different point p in the context of p , self isp . this is an important thing . just remember that every function inside a class definition shouldalways have the first argument as self and then the actual argument . so , init in this case takes twoarguments , but we always insert a third argument . let us look at how this works . for instance , if wesay p is equal to point , then will be passed as a , and will be passed as b. and this will set up apoint that we have drawn here , which internally is represented as self dot x is and self dot y is .now here is a slightly different function , it takes a point and shifts it . so , you want to say shift this toplus delta x and plus delta y. this function we called translate . so , it takes the amount of shift asthe argument , delta x and delta y. and as usual we are always providing self as the default firstargument . it just keep this in mind every python function , every python class , if you want to use afunction in the object oriented style , the first argument must necessarily be self and then the realarguments . so , what do we want to do when we want to translate a point , we want to take self dot xand move it to self dot x plus the value delta x. so , you want self dot x plus delta x. now , this is a verycommon paradigm in python and other programming languages where you want to take a name sayz , and then you want to shift it by some amount , say z plus or z is equal to z minus . whenever wehave this kind of a thing where the same name is being updated , there is a short form where we cancombine the operation with the assignment . so , self dot x plus equal to delta x is just a short cut inpython for self dot x equal to self dot x plus delta x it means that implicitly the name on the left isthe first argument to the operation mentioned along with the assignment operation . this is a veryconvenient shortcut which allows us to save some typing . instead of writing self dot x equal to selfdot x plus delta x we just say self dot x plus equal to delta x. this shifts the x coordinate of thecurrent point by the argument provided to translate . similarly , self dot y plus equal to delta y willshift the argument by the amount provided by delta y. for instance , now if we say p dot translatethen we get a new point which plus for the x coordinate and plus , so this plus gives us, and plus gives us . this shifts the point from , to , . this is how we define these internal .the internal implementation is defined inside the init function this is the function that is called whenthe point is set up and this associates these internal names x and y with the objects . this is wherethe implementation really gets set up , and then the functions that we define externally like translatemanipulate this internal representation in an appropriate way , so that it changes consistently withwhat you expect the functions to be . let us look at different functions . so supposing we want tocompute the distance of a point from the origin . so , we want to know what is this distance . thisdistance by pythagoras ' theorem is nothing but the square root of x square plus y square . so ,remember this is like a hypotenuse of a right angled triangle . so , you take a x square plus y squareroot and you get d. if you want the distance of a point , we do not give it any arguments , but wealways have this default argument self . so , we want to know what is the distance from , to thecurrent point . so , we would say something like in our earlier case p is equal to point say commaand then we will say p dot o distance to get its distance . maybe we would assign this to a name , letus not call it . so , we have might assign this to a name like n right . so , when we do this , it will look atthe current value of self dot x , the current value of self dot y , square them , add them and take thesquare root . now one thing to remember is that actually square root is not a function available bydefault in python . so , you actually have to import the math library . at the top of your class definition ,you should have remembered to write from math import star . assuming that we are done that thensquare root is defined . this is a typical function which returns some information about the point theearlier function just translated the point , did not tell us anything this is the function that returnsinformation about the point . now if o distance is something that we need to do often , then may beit 's useful to just keep the point in a different representation . so , you may remember or you mayhave seen somewhere in high school mathematics that if you take the point x , y then an alternativeway of representing where this point is to actually use polar coordinates . so , you can keep thisdistance and you can keep this angle . so , if i have r and theta it 's the same information as keeping xand y. the connection between the two is that x is r cos theta where cos is the trigonometric cosinefunction y is equal to r sin theta . and on the other hand , if i have x and y then i can recover r as wejust did for o distance it 's the square root of x square plus y square , and theta so y by x is actually ifyou if you divided y by x you get tan of theta that is because it 's sin divided by cos and the r cancels .so , y by x is tan theta , so theta is the tan inverse of y by x. now speaking of changingimplementation , we could change our implementation , so that we do not keep the internalrepresentation in terms of x and y , we actually keep it in terms of r and theta , but the functionsremain the same . for instance , we could take the earlier definition and change it . so , we again pass itx and y. so , from the user 's prospective , the user believes that the point is defined in terms of the xand y coordinate , but instead of using a and b as the argument directly to set up the point , we firstset up the r the radius by taking square root of a square plus b square . and then depending , so wewant to divide b by a , but if a is , then we have a special case b by a will give us an error . so , if a is ,we set the angle to be otherwise , this is the python function in the math library for tan inverse , arctan , we set theta to be the arc tan b minus a b divided a. so , we internally manipulate the x y versionto r theta using the same formula that we had shown before which is that r is square root of x squareplus y square and theta is tan inverse of y by x. only thing we have to take care is when x is equal to, we have to manually set theta to . now internally we are now keeping self dot r and self dottheta . we are not keeping self dot x and self dot y. this is useful because if you want the o distance the origin distance we just have to return the r value we do not do any computation . so , in otherwords if we are going to use o distance very often then it is better to use the calculation square roota square plus b square once at the beginning when we setup the point , and just return the r valuewithout any calculation whenever you want the distance from the origin . this might be arequirement depending on how you are using it and one implementation may be better than theother , but from the user 's perspective the same function is there there is self there is o distance . so ,if i take a point and i ask for o distance i get the distance from the origin whether or not the point isrepresented using x y or r theta . now , of course , using o distance is r theta is good for o distance notvery good for translate . if i want to translate the point by delta x delta y , i have to convert the pointback from r theta to x , y using x equal to r cos theta and y equal to r sin theta then do x plus delta x ,y to plus delta y and convert it back to r theta right . so , you pay a price in one function or the otherwith the x y representation translate is better with the r theta representation o distance is better .and this is a very typical case of the kind of compromise that you have to deal with and you have todecide which of these operations is slightly to be more common and more useful for you toimplement directly . if you think translate happens more often it 's probably better to use x and y ifyou think origin from the distance is more important , so probably better to use r and theta . so , oftenthere is no one good answer . it is not like saying that a heap implementation is always better than asorted list implementation for a priority queue . there may be tradeoffs which depend on the type ofuse they are going to put a data structure to as to which internal implementation works worst best ,but what you have to always keep in mind is that the implementation should not change the way thefunctions behave . to the external user , function must behave exactly the same way . in this particularexample just to illustrate what we have seen , again . we have changed the private implementation ,namely we have moved from x , y to r theta , but the functionality of the public interface the functionso distance translate etcetera remain exactly the same . now we have seen earlier that in pythonfunctions , we can provide default arguments which make sometimes the argument optional . so , forinstance , if you want to say that if we do not specify the x and y coordinates over a point then bydefault the point will be created at the origin . then we can use a equal to , and b equal to asdefault arguments , so that if the user does not provide values for a and b , then x will be set to andy will be set to . for instance , if we want to point at a specific place comma , we would invokethis function this class , we create an object by passing the argument comma , but if we do notpass any argument like p then we get a point at the origin . the function init clearly looks like aspecial function because of these underscore underscore on either side which we normally do notsee when we or normally do not thing of using to write a python function . as we said before pythoninterprets init as a constructor , so when we call a object like p equal to . , then this implicitly callsinit and init is used to set up self dot x self dot y. the internal representation of the point is set up inthe correct way by init . so , init is a special function . now python has other special functions . forinstance , one of the common things that we might want to do is to print out the value of an object ,what does an object contain . and for this the most convenient way is to convert the object to astring . the function str normally converts an object to a string , but how do we describe how strshould behave for an object , well there is special function that we can write called underscoreunderscore str . so , underscore underscore str is implicitly invoke when we write str of o. so , str of anobject o is nothing but o dot underscore underscore str . and for instance , print the function printimplicitly takes any name you pass to print and converts it to a string represent , when i say print xand x is an integer implicitly str of x is what is displayed . so , str is invoked and str in turn internallyinvokes this special function underscore underscore str . let us see how this would work for instancefor our point thing . so , if we want to represent the points so internally we are self dot x and self doty , we want to print this out in this form value x and the value y. so , what we do ? we set up str , soremember that self is always a parameter . so , what it does is , it first creates a string with the openbracket and the close bracket either end and a comma in the middle and in between the openbracket and the comma it puts the string representation of self dot x and in between the comma andthe close bracket it produces the string representation of self dot y. this creates a string from thevalue , it internally invokes str on the values themselves self dot x and self dot y and then constructsthese extra things the open close bracket and the comma to make it look like a point as we wouldexpect . another interesting function that python has as a special function is add . so , when we writeplus the function add is invoked . in other words p plus p , if these are two points would invoke punderscore underscore add p . so , what we would expect that if i had p and if i had p then iwould get something which gives me a point where i combine these two . so , i get the x coordinate asx p plus p and y coordinate p plus p . it 's up to us . i mean it does not mean it has to be thisway , but if i say p p the function that is invoked is add . and it is up to us define what add means .let us assume that we want to construct a new point whose x coordinate and y coordinate is the sumof the two points given to us . here is way we would do it we would create a new point whose xcoordinate is self dot x plus p dot x. now , notice that , self is the function associated with p in thiscase , add so self refers to p . when i say p plus p and the other argument p is the point p. so , ican look at the values of p and say p dot x p dot y , i can look at my value and say self dot x self dot y ,and now i can combine these by creating a new point self dot x plus p dot x and self dot x plus p doty. for instance , if we have two points at , and , then this will return a point at , and i muststore it in new point , so p now becomes a new point whose x coordinate is and y coordinate is .in the same way , we could have a special way of defining multiplication , and in python theunderscore underscore mult function is the one that is implicitly called by multiply . similarly , we candefine comparisons we might say what is to be done when we compare whether p is less than p ,do we check both coordinates are less , we check the distance from the origin is less we havecomplete freedom how to define this . we just write p less then p for readability enough in ourprogram , and internally it will call a function less than lt , similarly greater than will call the functiongt , and there is something for less than equal to greater then equal to and so on . these are all veryconvenient functions that python allows us to call implicitly , and allows us to use conventionaloperators and conventional functions in our code . so , we do not really have to think of these objectsin a different way when we are coding our programs . there are several other such functions it isimpossible to list all of them and it is not useful to list all of them at this introductory stage when youare learning python , but you can always look up the python documentation , and see all the specialfunctions that are defined for objects and classes . we have seen how to implement data structuressuch as , stacks , queues and heaps using the built in list type of python . it turns out that one can gobeyond the built in types in python and create our own data types . so , we will look at this in moredetail in this weeks ' lectures . let us revisit what we lean by a data structure . a data structure isbasically an organization of information whose behavior is defined through an interface . so aninterface is nothing but the allowed set of operations , for instances for a stack the allowed set ofoperations are push and pop . and of course , we can also query whether a stack is empty or not .likewise , for a queue the only way we can modify a queue is to add something to the tail of thequeue using the function add q and remove the element at the head of the queue using the functionremove q. and for a max heap for instance , we have the functions insert to add an element anddelete max which removes the largest element from the heap . now , just because we implement aheap as a list it does not mean that the functions that are defined for lists are actually legal for theheap . so if we have a heap h , which is implemented as a python list though the list will allow anappend function . the append function on it is own does not insert a value and maintain the heapproperty . so , in general the call such as h dot append would not be legal . so , we want to definenew abstract data types in terms of the operations allowed . we do not want to look at theimplementation and ask whether it is a list or not , because we do not want the implementation todetermine what is allowed , we only want the actual operations that we define as the abstractinterface to be permitted . for instance if we have a stack s and we push value v then the property ofa stack guarantees that if we immediately apply pop the value we get back is our last value push andtherefore we should get back v. in other words , if we execute this sequence we first to s dot push andthen we do a pop then the value that we pushed must be the value that we get back . this is a way ofabstractly defining the property of a stack and how push and pop interact without actually telling usanything about how the internal values are represented . in the same way if we have an empty queueand we add to it two elements u and v and then we remove the head of the queue , then we expectthat we started with an empty queue and then we put in from this end u and then we put in a v , thenthe element that comes out should be the first element namely u. in other words assuming that thisis empty then if we add u and add v and then remove the head we should get back first element thatwe put in namely u. the important thing is that we would like to define the behavior of a data typewithout reference to the implementation . now this can be very tedious because you have to makesure that it capture all the properties between functions , but this can be done and this is technicallyhow an abstract data type is defined . now large purposes we will normally define it more informallyand we will make reference to the implementation , but we definitely do not want theimplementation to determine how these functions work . in other words , we should be able tochange one implementation to another one such that the functions behave the same way and theoutside user has no idea which implementation is used . now this is often the case when we need tooptimize implementation , we might come up with an inefficient implementation and then optimizeit . for instance we saw that for a priority queue we could actually implement it as a sorted list andthen we could implement insert as an insert operation in a sorted list which you take order n time ,but delete max would just remove the head of the list . this is not optimal because over a sequenceof n inserts and deletes this takes time order n square . so if we replace the internal implementationfrom a sorted list to a heap we get better behavior , but in terms of the actual values that the usersees as a sequence of inserts and delete max the user does not see any difference between thesorted list implementation and the heap implementation . perhaps , there is a perception that the oneis faster than the other , but the actual correctness of the implementation should not be affected byhow you choose to represent the data . so , this is the essence of defining an abstract datatype . so ,good way to think of an abstract datatype is as a black box which allows limited interaction . imaginesomething like an atm machine . so , we have the data structure as a black box and we have certainbuttons which are the public interface , these are the functions that we are allowed to use . in thispicture imagine this is a stack and the buttons were allowed to push are pop and push let they areallowed to remove the top elements from the stack they are allowed to put an element into thestack . now this requires us to also add and view things from the stack , so we also have a slot forinput which is shown as a kind of a thing at the bottom here we have the slot for input . and we havethe way to receive information about the state of the stack . so we can imagine that we have somekind of a display . this is typically how we would like to think of a data structure , we do not want toknow what is inside the black box we just want to specify that if we do a sequence of button pushesand we start supplying input through the input box what do we expect to see if the display . otherthan this , no other manipulation should be allowed . we are not allowed to exploit what is inside thebox in order to quickly get access say to the middle of a stack or the middle of a queue . so we do notwant such operations , we only want those operations which the externally visible interface or thebuttons in this case of the black box picture allow us to use . in a sense this is already implementedwhen we use the built in data types of python , if we announce that the name l is of type list bysetting l to the empty list then immediately python will allow us to use operations like append andextend on this list , but because it is of list type and not dictionary type we would not be able toexecute an operations such as keys which is defined for dictionaries are not list . likewise if we defined to be an empty dictionary then we can use a function such as d dot values to get the list of valuescurrently stored , but we can not manipulate d as a list . so , we can not say d dot append it will give usan error . python uses the type information that it has about the value give assign to a name todetermine what functions are legal which is exactly what we are trying to do with these abstract datatypes . we are trying to say that the data type on it is own should allow only certain limited types ofaccess whose behavior is specified without telling us anything about the internal implementation .remember for instance we saw that in a dictionary even if we add a sequence or values in theparticular order we ask for the values after sometime they may not written in the same order ,because internally there is some optimization in order to make it fast to look up a value for it . wehave no idea actually how dictionaries implemented inside , but what we do know is that if weprovide a key and that key is a valid key we will get the associated with that key , we do not ask howthis is done and we do not know whether from one version of python to the next the way in whichthis is implemented changes . our question is , that instead of using the built in list for stacks , queuesand heaps and other data structures can we also defined a data type in which certain operations arepermitted according to the type that we start with . this is one of the main things which areassociated with a style of programming called object oriented program . in object oriented program ,we can provide data type definitions for new data types in which we do precisely what we have beentalking about we describe the public interface , that is the operations that are allowed on the dataand separately we provide an implementation which should be private , we will discuss later that inpython we do not actually have a full notion of privacy because of the nature of the language . butideally the implementation should not be visible outside only the interface should allow the user tointeract with the implemented data . of course , the implementation must be such that the functionsthat are visible to the user behave correctly . so here for instance if we had a heap the publicinterface would say insert and delete max , the private implementation may be a sorted list or it maybe a heap and then we would then have to ensure that if we are using a sorted list we implementdelete max and insert in the correct way and if we switch from that to a heap the priority queueoperations remain the same . in the terminology of object oriented programming there are twoimportant concepts classes and objects . a class is a template very much like a function definition isa template , when we say def and define a function the function does not execute it just gives us ablue print saying that this is what would happen if this function were called with a particularargument and that argument to be substituted for the formal parameter in the function and the codein the function will be execute to the corresponding value . in the same way a class sets up a blueprint or a template for a data type . it tells us two things it tells us what is the internalimplementation ? how is data stored ? and it gives us the functions that are used to implement theactual public interface . so , how you manipulate the internal data in order to effect the operationsthat the public interface allows . now once we have this template we can construct many instances ofit . so , you have the blue print for a stack you can construct many independent stacks , eachindependent stack has it is own data that stacks do not interfere with each other . each of them has acopy of the function that we have defined associated with it . rather than the kind of the maindifference from classical programming is , in classical programming you would have for instance afunction like say push define and it will have two parameters typically a stack and a value . so , youhave one function and then you provide it the stack that you want to manipulate . on the other hand ,now we have several stacks s , s , s , etcetera which are created as instance as class , and logicallyeach of them has it is own push function . so there is a push associated with s , that the pushassociated is s , the push associated with s and so on . each of them is a copy of the same functionderived from this template , but this implicitly attach to the single object . so , this is just a slightdifference in perspective instead of having a function to which you pass the object that you want tomanipulate you have the object and you tell it what function to apply to itself . so , let us look at akind of example this would not be a detailed example it will just give you a flavor of what we aretalking about . here is a skeleton of a definition of a class heap . so now , we instead of using the builtin list we want to define our own data type heap . so there are some function definitions . these defstatements and these correspond to definition in the functions and what we will see is that insidethese definitions we will have values which are stored in each copy of the heap . so , just to get a littlebit of an idea about how this is would work . when we create on object of type heap we call it like afunction . so , we say h is equal to heap l , so this implicitly says give me an instance of the class heapwith the initially value l passed to it now this calls this function init which is why it is called init . so ,init is what is called a constructor . a constructor is a function that is called when the object is createdand sets it up initially in this particular case our constructor is presumed to take an arbitrary list ofvalues say , , and heapify it . so , somewhere inside the code of init there will be aheapification operation which we are not actually shown in this slide . this is how you create objects .you first define a class we will look at a complete example soon , we define a class and then you callthe class sort of like a function and the name that is attach to this function call or this class werebecomes a new object , as we said we have functions like insert and delete max define for heaps , butit is like we have the separate copy of this function for each individual heaps . in this case we arecreated a heap h , so we want to tell h insert in yourself the value . so , we write that as insert withrespect to h. so , h dot insert , as suppose to insert h which would be the normal functionalstyle of writings . we would normally pass it the heap and the value , here instead we say given theheap h apply to the heap h the function insert with the argument . the next line says apply to theheap h in function insert to the value and then for instance we can now ask h to return themaximum value by it is an h dot delete max and store the return value in the main v. so , what wewould like to emphasize is that an abstract data type should be seen as a black box . like a black boxhas a public interface the buttons that you can push to update and query the data type to add things ,delete things , and find out what whether the data type is empty and so on . inside we have a privateimplementation . this actually stores data in some particular way to make the public functions workcorrectly . but the important thing is , changing the private implementation should not affect how thefunctions behave in terms of input and output . they may behave differently in terms of efficiency ,you might see that one version is faster than another or one version slower than another , but this isnot the same as saying that the functions change . so , we do not want the values to change , if wehave a priority queue and we insert a set of values and then delete max no matter how the priorityqueue is actually implemented internally the delete max should give us the same value at the end .so , we saw that python supports object oriented programming , we shall look at it in more detail inthe next couple of lectures in these weeks course , but the main concept associated with thisobjected oriented programming are classes and objects . classes are templates for data types andobjects are instances of these classes they have a concrete data types which we use in our program .let us look at a data structure problem involving job schedulers . job scheduler maintains a list ofpending jobs with priorities . now , the job scheduler has to choose the next job to execute at anypoint . so , whenever the processor is free it picks the job , not the job which arrived earliest , but theone with maximum priority in the list and then schedules it . new jobs keep joining the list , each withits own priority and according to their priority they get promoted ahead of other jobs which mayhave joined earlier . so , our question is how should the scheduler maintain the list of pending jobsand their priorities ? so that it can always pull out very quickly the one with the highest priority toschedule next . this is like a queue , but a queue in which items have priority based on some othercharacteristic not on when they arrived . so , we saw a normal queue is a first in first out object , theones that arrive first leave first . in a priority queue , they leave according to their priority . there aretwo operations associated with the priority queue , one is delete max . in delete queue we just saidwe take the element at the head of the queue . in delete max we have to look through the queue andidentify and remove the job with the highest priority . note of course , that the priorities of twodifferent jobs may be the same in which case we can pick any one and the other operation is whichwe normally called add to the queue we will call insert and insert just adds a new job to the list andeach job when it is added comes with it is own priority . based on linear structures that we alreadystudied , we can think of maintaining these jobs just as a list . now , if it is an unsorted list when weadd something to the queue we can just add it to the list append it in any position . this takesconstant time however , to do a delete max we have to scan through the list and search for themaximum element and as we have seen in an unsorted list , it will take us order n time to find themaximum element in list because we have to scan all the items . the other option is to keep the listsorted . this helps to delete max , for instance , if we keep it sorted in descending order the firstelement of the list is always the largest element . however , the price we pay is for inserting becauseto maintain the sorted order when we insert the element we have to put it in the right position andas we saw in insertion sort , insert will take linear time . so , as a trade off we either take linear timefor delete max or linear time for insert . if we think of n jobs entering and leaving the queue one wayor another we end up spending n squared time processing these n jobs . this is the fundamentallimitation of keeping the data in a one dimensional structure . let us look at two dimensionalstructures the most basic two dimensional structure that we can think of is a binary tree . a binarytree consists of nodes and each node has a value stored in it and it has possibly a left and a rightchild . we start at the root which is the top of the tree and then each node will have or children . anode which has no children is called a leaf and then with respect to a child we call the parent node ,the node above it and we refer to the children as the left child and the right child . so , our goal is tomaintain a priority queue as a special kind of binary tree which we will call a heap . this tree will bebalanced . a balanced tree is one in which roughly speaking at each point the left and right sides arealmost the same size . because of this it turns out that in a balanced tree , if we have n nodes then theheight of the tree will be logarithmic because remember that the height doubles with each level andas a result of which we can fit n nodes in log n levels provided it is balanced and because it is ofheight log n , we will achieve both insert and delete max in order log n time . this means that if wehave to add and remove n elements from the queue , overall we will go from n squared to n log n andanother nice feature about a heap is that we do not have to fix n in advance this will work as theheap grows and shrinks so we do not need to know what n is . what is a heap ? heap is a binary treewith two properties , the first property is structural which are the values which are stored in the tree ,remember that leaves , nodes in a binary tree may have children , children or children . so , wecould have in general a very uneven structure . heaps have a very regular structure when we have aheap we have a binary tree in which we fill each level from top to bottom , left to right . in otherwords , at any point a heap consists of a number of filled levels and then in the bottom level we havenodes filled from left to right and then possibly some unfilled nodes . the other property with theheap , the first property is structural , it just tells us how the values look in the heap . in this node , forexample , in this picture the blue nodes are those which have values and the empty nodes areindicated with open circles at the bottom . the second property about the heap is the valuesthemselves . so , the heap property in this case what we call the max heap property because we areinterested in maximum values says that every value is bigger than the values of its children . so , atevery node if you look at the value and we look at the value in the left child and the right child thenthe parent will have a larger value than the both the children . let us see some examples . here is afour node heap , because it has four nodes we fill the root in the first level and finally , in the secondlevel we have only one node which is a left most and notice that the values are correctly ordered ,is bigger than and , is bigger than its only child , has no children . so , there are noconstraints . here is another example where the bottom level is actually full , here we have nodesand once again at every point we see that is bigger than and , is bigger than and . so , wehave the value property the max heap property along with the structural property . here is anexample of something which is structurally not a heap because it is a heap we should have it filledfrom top to bottom , left to right . so , we should have a node here to the left of before we add aright child therefore , this is not a heap . similarly , here the node could not have been added herebefore we filled in the right child of . so , once again this has not been filled correctly left to right ,top to bottom and therefore , this is not a heap . this particular tree satisfies the structural propertyof a heap in the sense that it is filled from top to bottom , but we have here a violation of the heapproperty because has a child which has a larger value than it namely . our first job is to insert avalue into a heap while maintaining the heap property . so , the first thing to note is that we have nochoice about where to put the new node , remember that heap nodes are constructed top to bottom ,left to right . if we want to insert it must come below the to the left because we have to start anew level , since the previous level is full . the problem is that this may not satisfy the heap propertyin this case is bigger than its parent . although this is now structurally correct , it does not havethe right value distribution . so , we have to restore the heap property in some way . this is what wedo we first create the node , we put the new value into that node and then we start looking atviolations with respect to it is parent . we notice that and are not correctly ordered . so , weexchange them , right now this is a new node . we have to check whether it is correctly ordered withrespect to it s current parent . so , we look and we find that it is not . so , again we exchange these .now , notice that because was already bigger than , will remain bigger than . there is noneed to check anything down from where we got , we only have to look up . now , we have to checkwhether there is still a problem above . in this case , there is no problem is smaller than . so , westop . let us add another node . supposing , we add now to the heap that we just created . so ,again creates a new node at this point . now , being bigger than we have to walk up and swap itthen again we compare and its parent and we notice that is bigger than . so , we swap itagain then we look at the root , in this case and we find that is bigger than . so , we swap itagain and now has no parents and it is definitely bigger than it is children . so , we can stop . howmuch time does insert take ? in each time we insert a node , we have to check with its parent , swap ,check with its parent , swap and so on , but the good thing is we only walk up a path we never walkdown a path . so , the number of steps you walk up will be bounded by the height of the tree . now ,we argued before or we mentioned before that a balanced tree will have height log n. so , we canactually measure it correctly by saying that the number of nodes at level i is to the i. initially , wehave node to the , then at the first level we have nodes to the and second level we havenodes to the and so on . if we do it this way then we find that when k levels are filled , we will haveto the k minus nodes and therefore , turning this around we will find that if we have n nodes thenthe number of levels must be log n. therefore , insert walks up a path , the path is equal to the heightof the tree , and the height of the tree is order of log n. so , insert takes time order log n. the otheroperation we need to implement in a heap is delete max . now , one thing about a heap is that themaximum value is always at the root this is because of the heap property you can inductively seethat because each node is bigger than it s children the maximum value in the entire tree must be atthe root . so , we know where the root is now the question is how do we remove it efficiently ? if weremove this node , first of all we can not remove the node because it is a root . if you remove thisvalue then we have to put some value there . on the other hand , the number of values in the node inthe heap has now shrunk . so , this node at the bottom right must be deleted because the structuralproperty of the heap says that we must fill the tree left to right , top to bottom . we are going top tobottom and we have run out of a value . the last node that we added was the one at the right mostend of the bottom row and that must go . so , we have a value which is missing at the top and wehave a value at the bottom namely whose node is going to be deleted . so , the strategy now is tomove this value to and then fix things , right . so , we first remove the from the root , we removethe node containing and we move the to the position of the root . now , the problem with this iswe have moved an arbitrary value not the maximum value to the top . obviously , there is going to besome problem with respect to it s children . so , here it turns out that is bigger than which iscorrect , but unfortunately it is smaller than . to restore the property what we do is , we look atboth directions right and we exchange it with the largest child . suppose , this had been here thenwe could swapped with here or with , both violations are there , but if you move thissmaller child up then will not be bigger than , so we move the largest one . in this case we moveup right and now we have again and now we have to again check whether it is correct withrespective to its children , again it is not . so , we move the largest one up namely and then wesee now whether it is correct with respect to it s children . at this point is bigger than . so , westop . just as insert followed a single path from the new node at the leaf up to the root , delete maxwill follow a single path from the root down to a leaf . once again the cost of delete max will beproportional to the height of the tree which as we said earlier is log n. let us do another delete wedelete , in this case , now we remove the node for , goes to the root . we compare with it schildren , and and find that it is not satisfying heap property . so , we move the larger of the twoup namely . now , we look at its children , new children here and and again we see it is notsatisfying the property . so , the larger one moves up and once it reaches the leaf there are noproperties to be satisfied anymore . so , we stop . one very attractive feature of heaps is that we canimplement this tree directly in a list or in an array . so , we have an n node heap , we can represent itas a list or an array with position to n minus . the position represents a root then in order andrepresent the children , then , , , , nodes are the next level and so on . so , just as we said wefilled up this heap left to right , top to bottom right . in the same way , we number the nodes also topto bottom , left to right . so , we start with at the root , then on the left , on the right then , , ,, , , , and so on . from this you can see that , if i have a position labeled i then the two childrenare read i plus and i plus right . so , the children of are into plus , which is and intoplus , which is . similarly , children of are into plus , which is and into plus which is. so , just by doing index calculations for a position in the heap we can figure out where it s childrenare and by reversing this calculation we can also find the index of the parent , the parent of j is that jminus by . now , j minus by may not be an integer . so , we take the floor . if we take , forexample , minus is , by is . if we take , for example , minus is , by is . wetake the floor and we get . this allows us to manipulate parent and children nodes by just doingindex arithmetic we go from i to i plus , i plus to go to the children and we go from j to j minusby floor to go to the parent . how do we build a heap . a naive way to build a heap is just to take alist of values and insert them one by one using the heap operation into the heap . so , we start with anempty heap , we insert x , create a new heap containing x , we insert x , creating a heap of x , xand so on . each operation takes log n time of course , n will be growing , but it does not matter if wetake the final n as an upper bound we do n inserts each just log n and we can build this heap in ordern log n time . there is a better way to do this heap building if we have the array as x to x n then thelast half of the nodes correspond to the leaves of the tree . now , a leaf node has no properties tosatisfy because it has no children . we do not need to do anything we can just leave the leaves asthey are . we go one level above and then we can fix all heap errors at one level above right and thenagain we move one level above and so on . so , we do the kind of top to bottom heap fixing that wedid with the delete max , while we are building the heap . so , as we are going up the number of stepsthat we need to propagate this error goes higher and higher because we need to start at a higherpoint on the other hand the number of nodes for which this happens is smaller . let us look at thishere . what we are saying is that if we start with the original list of say elements to , then thenumbers to already satisfy the heap property . whatever values there are , we do not need toworry , then we go up and we may have to swap this with it s children , we may have to swap this withit s children and so on . for nodes we have to do one level of shifting perhaps to repair the heapproperty then we go up now and are the original values , they may be wrong . so , again we mayhave to shift it down one value and then another value . now , we need two levels of shifting , but wehave only two nodes for this . the number of nodes for which this is required is shrinking , it s halvingactually and the number of steps for which we have to do it is increasing by . we will not do acareful calculation here , but it turns out that as a result of this , in this particular way of doing theheapify by starting from the bottom of the heap and working upwards rather than inserting one at atime into an empty heap actually takes us only linear time order n. a final use of heap is to actuallysort , we are taking out one element at a time starting with maximum one . it is natural that if we startwith a list , build a heap and then do n times delete max we will get the list of values in descendingorder . we build a heap in order n time , call delete max n times and extract the elements indescending order . so , we get an order n log n algorithm for heap . now , the question is where do wekeep these values . well , remember that a heap is an array . initially , we have a heap which has nelements . so , we build this heap now we said that the delete max will remove the element at the topbecause that is the root , but it will also create a vacancy here , this is the value that will go to the top ,this is the last leaf which will go the top when we fix the delete max . since there is a vacancy here wecan actually move this to this position , the maximum value will now go to the end of the heap , butthe next time we process the heap there will be only n minus one values . so , we will not look at thatvalue we will just use from to n minus . again this value will come here this value will go there andnow we will have two elements fixed and so on . so , one by one the maximum value , secondmaximum value and so on will get into the same list or array in which we are storing the heap andeventually the heap will come out in ascending order . this is actually an n log n sort . it has same asasymptotic complexity as merge sort we saw before and unlike merge sort which forced us to createa new array everytime we merge two lists , this is actually creating a list in place . to summarize heapsare a tree based implementation of priority queues in which both insert and delete max can be donein log n time . we can do a bottom up heapify to build a heap in order n time and these are trees , butthey can be manipulated very easily using an array . now , in this case we were looking at max heapswe can also do a dual construction where we change the heap condition to say that each elementmust be smaller than its children , in which case we have what is called a min heap and then insteadof delete max , the operation we perform is delete min . everything is exactly symmetric to the othercase . when we move something up we have to move it down according to the min condition andwhen we insert something at the bottom we have to move it up right . so , the insert and delete minwork exactly like insert and delete max , except that the comparisons are reversed because we nowhave a min condition rather than the max condition locally and finally , we saw that with a heap wecan do sorting in order n log time in place . in the s niklaus wirth , the inventor of theprogramming language pascal wrote a very influential book called algorithms plus data structuresequals programs . so , the title emphasises the importance of both algorithms and data structures ascomponents of effective programs . so far we have seen algorithms in some detail . so , now let us takea closer look at some specialized data structures . the data structures that we have seen that are builtinto python began with arrays and lists which are just sequences of values . we also saw dictionarieswhich are key value pairs and which are very useful for maintaining various types of information .another built in data type that is available in python is the set . set is like a list except that you do nothave duplicates . in python , one way of writing a set is to write a list with braces like this . so , here wehave associated with the name colours a list of values red , black , red and green . notice that in settingit up , we have repeated red , but because this is a set , the duplicate red would be automaticallyremoved . so , if we print the name colours , we just get the list black , red and green . now , since theempty brace notation is already used , for empty dictionary if we want to create an empty set , wehave to call the set function as follows . so , we say colours equal to set with no arguments . like listsand other data structures , we can test membership using in . so , if in the previous lists set colourswhich had red , black and green , we ask whether black is in colours by using the word in , then , thereturn value is true . in general we can convert any list to a set using the set function . we saw that ifwe give no arguments to set you get an empty set , but if we give a list such as this , , , , withduplicates and assign it to the name numbers , then because its a set the duplicate ones will beremoved and we will get a list of , we will get a set of numbers , , , , . notice again that theorder in which the set is printed need not be the order in which you provided it . this is very muchlike a dictionary sets are optimized for internal storage to make sure there are no duplicatesetcetera . so , we should not assume anything about the order of elements in set . an interestingfeature is that a string itself is essentially a list of characters . so , if we give a string to a set , then itproduce the set function , then it produces a set which consists of individual letters from this set . so ,if we give this string banana to the set function , then we get the three individual letters a , n and bwithout duplicates in the set . so , as you would expect sets support basic operations like theircounterpart in mathematics , so suppose we set up the odd numbers to be the set of all odd numbersbetween and and the prime numbers to be the set of all prime numbers from and betweenand using these set function as we saw before . if we write this vertical bar , then we can get theunion of the two sets . so , odd union prime will be those elements which are either in odd or inprime . so , we get one from the top two from the bottom , , , , . we get all the elements inboth the sets , but without any duplicates . if we ask for the intersection of two sets , we useampersand to denote this . we get those which occur in both sets , those sets , those numbers whichare both odd and prime and in this case , , and . notice again that the order in which thesenumbers are printed may be arbitrary . set difference asks for those elements that are in odd , but notin prime . in other words , odd numbers that are not prime , in this particular collection and areexamples of odd numbers that are not prime . and finally , unlike union which collects elements whichare in both sets , we can do an exclusive or which takes elements which are exactly in one of the twosets . if we use this carrot symbol , then we will get from the first set , from the first set and fromthe second set because , , , and occur in both sets . so , we will not talk much more about sets ,but you can use them in various contexts in order to keep track of a collection of values withoutduplicates using these built in operations . let us look at different ways in which we can manipulatesequences . a list as we saw is a sequence in which we can freely insert and delete values all over theplace . now , if we impose some discipline on this , we get specialized data structures one of which is astack . a stack is a last in first out list . so , we can only remove from a stack the element that we lastadded to it . usually this is denoted by giving two operations . when we push an element on to astack , we add it to the end of the stack and when we pop a stack , we implicitly get the last value thatwas added . now , this is easy to implement using built in python list . we can assume that stacks growto the right . so , we push to the right and we pop from the right . so , push s x would just be append xto s. so , you can use the builtin append function that is available for lists to say s dot append x whenwe want to push and it turns out that python 's lists actually have a built in function called pop whichremoves the last element and returns it to us . so , we just have to say s dot pop , where s is a list andwe get exactly the behavior that we expect of our stack . a stack is typically used to keep track ofrecursive function calls where we want to keep going through a sequence of functions and then ,returning to the last function that was called before this . in particular when we do back tracking , wehave a stack like behavior because as we add queens and remove them , what we need to doeffectively is to push the latest queen onto the stack , so that when we backtrack , we can pop it andundo the last move . another disciplined way of using a list is a queue . unlike a stack which is last infirst out , a queue is a first in first out sequence . in other words , we add at one end and we remove atanother end . this is exactly like a queue that you see in real life , where you join the queue at theback and when your turn comes , you are at the head of the queue and then you get served . so , addq will add x to the rear of the queue and remove q will remove the element which is at the head ofthe q. once again we can use python lists and it turns out that it is convenient to assume that a list itthat represents a queue has its head at the right end rather than the rear at the left and the head atthe right . this is because we can use pop as before , but now when we want to insert into a queue ,we can use the insert function that is provided with this . we have not seen this explicitly , but if youhave gone through the documentation , you will find it . if i have a list l and if i insert with twoarguments j and x , what it means is to put the value j before position j , put the value x beforeposition j in particular if i insert at position , this has the effect of putting something before everyelement in the list . so , add q q comma x is just the same as q dot insert comma x. in other words ,push an x to the beginning . if i have a queue at this form which has some values v , v and so on ,then this insert function will just put an x at the beginning and as we said before , the reason we havechosen to use this notation is that we can then use the pop to just remove the last element of thelist . queues and stacks can both be like easily implemented using built in lists . so , one typical use ofthe queue is to systematically explore through search space . imagine that we have a rectangular mcross n grid and we have a knight . knight as a chess piece starting at a position s x comma s y. in thiscase , the knight is denoted by this red symbol . so , this is our knight . now , the knight move , if you arefamiliar with chess is to move two squares up and one square left . this is a knight move . similarly ,this is a knight move similarly this is a knight move and so on . so , knight move consists of movingtwo squares in one direction , then one square across . so , these are all the positions that arereachable from this initial position , where the knight move there are eight of them . so , our questionis that we have this red starting square and we have a green diamond indicating a target square . cani hop using a sequence of knight moves from the red square to the green diamond ? so , one way todo this is to just keep growing the list of squares one can reach . so , in the first step we examine thesesquares that we can reach as we said using one move from the starting position and we mark themas squares that are available to us to reach in one step . now , we can pick one of them for instanceone of the top left and explore what we can reach from there . so , if we start at this square forinstance and now we explore its neighbors , some of its neighbors are outside the grid . so , we throwthem away . we keep only those neighbors inside the grid and one of them notice brings us back tothe place where we started from . now , we could pick another square for example , we could pick thissquare over here and if we explore that it will again in turn produce neighbors and some of theseneighbors overlap the yellow neighbors . i indicate it by joint shading of yellow and green and inparticular because both of them were originally reached from the starting point . of course , thestarting point reaches from both of them . the starting point is both colored yellow and green . so , asyou can see in the process of marking , these squares , sometimes we mark the square twice and wehave to have a systematic way of making sure that we do this correctly and do not get into a loop . so ,what we are trying to do is the following . so , in the first step we are trying to mark all squaresreachable in one move from the starting point s x comma s y. then , we try to mark all squaresreachable from x in one move , call this x , and then we will explore all squares reachable from xin one move , call this x and soon . now , one of the problems is that we saw that since we couldreach x from x in one move , then the squares that can reach from x will include squares in x .so , how do we ensure that we do not keep exploring an already marked square and go around andround in circles and related to this question is how do we know when to stop . of course since weknow that we are looking for the target square , if ever we marked the target square , we can stop . onthe other hand , it is possible that the target square is not reachable . in this case , we may keep goingon exploring without ever realizing that we are fruitlessly going ahead and we are never going toreach the target square . so , how do we know when to stop ? so , a queue is very useful for this . whatwe do is we maintain at any point a queue of cells which remain to be explored . initially the queuecontains only the start node which is s x comma s y. at each point we remove the head of the queueand we explore its neighbors , but when we explore its neighbors , we mark these neighbors . some ofthem may already be marked . so , we look at a x , a y , the element we remove from the head of thequeue and we look at all the squares reachable at one step . so , reachable means i can take oneknight move and go there and the result of this knight move does not take me off the board . so , imark all these squares which are reachable from a x and a y , some of which were already marked ,some of which are marked just now . so , what i do is , i take the ones which i have newly marked andadd them to the queue saying that these are being newly marked . now i need to also explore thesesquares for what i can reach from there . so , this guarantees that a square which has been reachedonce will never be reintroduced into the queue . finally , we keep going until the queue is empty .when the queue is empty , there have been no new squares added which are unmarked before theywere added . so , there is nothing more to explore and we have gone to every square we can possiblyvisit . here is some python pseudo code for this . we are going to explore from s x , s y to t x , t y. weassume that we have given to us the values m and n indicating the number of rows and columns inour grid . so , what we do is initially we set the marked array to be . remember this listcomprehension notation . it says for i in range n gives us a list of n zeros and we do this m times for jin range m. so , i we will get a list consisting of m blocks and each block having n zeros . this says thatinitially nothing is marked . now , we set up the thing by saying that we mark the starting node and weinsert the starting node from the queue . now , so long the queue is not empty , we pop one elementfrom the queue . in this case s x , s y will come out . now , there is a function which we have notwritten , but which will examine all the neighbors that i can reach from a x , a y and give me a list ofsuch pairs of nodes i can reach . for each neighbor nx ny if it is not marked , then i will mark it and iwill insert it into the queue , right . so , i pull out an element from the queue to explore , look at all itsneighbors those which are not marked , i mark and put them back in the queue and finally , in thiscase i am not even going to check whether i have marked t x or t y in the middle . i know that if i havea finite set of squares at some point , this process has to stop . at the end i will return whether i willreturn the value of marked at the target node t x , t y. so , if i have reached it , this will return whichis true . if it is not reached , it will return which is false . let us look at an example of how this works .so , here we have a three by three grid . remember that the cells are and by our namingconvention we want to start from the top center square . this is our source and here in the center isour target . so , let us erase all these marks and set up this thing as we expect . so , we say that initiallythe queue that we want to have as a source node and we mark the source node in the grid . themarking is indicated by a red mark . so , this is how we start . so , our first step is to remove this fromthe queue and explore its neighbors . now , its neighbors are , , and . this means we willhenceforth remove these brackets because it is more annoying . so , you just grow it like this . so , wesay that my queue consists of comma and comma . this is my queue of vertices way to beexplored . at each step i will now remove the first element of the queue and explore its neighbors .when i explore the neighbors of , i will find one of them is of course is where i start it from . i onlylook at unmarked neighbors . so , an unmarked neighbor is . i will add that back at the end of thequeue . now , proceeding i will take the next element of the queue which is and look at itsneighbors . so , can go back again to the original thing and it also has a new thing here which is. so , continuing like this i remove which is this one and then , look at its neighbors . so , one of itsneighbors is , but one of them is . so , i get a new neighbor here and then , i continue bytaking of the queue . so , is this one . so , it has one new neighbor unexplored which is that one .so , my queue now has followed by . then , when i explore , i get this neighbor at thebottom which is . now , when i remove which is this one , i find that both these neighbors iexplored . so , i add nothing . i continue with . again , i find both its neighbors explored and donothing . now at this point , the queue is empty and since the queue is empty , i stop and i find thatmy square of interest namely was not marked . therefore , in this case the target is not reachablefrom the source node . this is actually an example of breadth first search which you will study if youlook at graphs , but it just illustrates that a queue is a nice way to systematically keep track of howyou explore through a search space . to summarize data structures are ways of organizing informationthat allow efficient processing in certain contexts . so , we saw that python has a builtinimplementation of lists of sets rather we also saw that we can take sequences and use them in twostructured ways . so , stack is a last in first out list and we can use this to keep track of recursivecomputations and queues are first in first out list that are useful for breadth first exploration . we willbe looking at backtracking . in backtracking we systematically search for a solution one step at a timeand when we hit a dead end we undo the last step and try the next option . now , in the process ofdoing the backtracking we need to generate all the possibilities . for instance , remember when we tryto printout all the queens we ran through every possible position for every queen on every row , andif it was free then we tried it out and if the solution extended to a final case then we print it out . nowif we look at the solutions that we get for the queens , each queen on row is in a different columnfrom every other queen . the column numbers if we read then row by row , the column numbers forma permutation of to n minus . so , each number to n minus occurs exactly once as a columnnumber for the n queens . so , one way of solving a problem like queens or similar problems isactually it generate all permutations and keep trying them one at a time . this give rise to thefollowing question if we have a permutation of to n minus how do we generate the nextpermutation . this is like thinking of it as a next number , but this could be in an arbitrary number ofsymbols . suppose , we have the letters a to m. so , these are the first thirteen letters of the alphabetand we treat the dictionary order of words as the ordering of numbers , we think of them as digits ifyou want to think of it is base thirteen . here for instance , is a number in a base thirty or nowalternatively a rearrangement of a to m in some order . now what we want to is , what is the nextrearrangement after this you immediately next one in dictionary order . in order to solve this problemthe first observation we can make is that , if we have a sequence of such letters or digits the smallestpermutation is the order in which the elements are arranged in ascending order . so we start with awhich is smallest one then b and c and so on and there is no smaller permutation than this one .similarly , the largest permutation is one in which all the elements are in descending order , so westart with the largest element m and we work backwards down to a. if we want to find the nextpermutation we need to find as short suffix as possible that can be incremented , it is probablyeasiest to do it in terms of a numbers but let us do it with letters . the shortest suffix that can beincremented consists of something followed by the longest suffix can not be incremented . so this willbecome a little clear when we work through an example . we want to find the longest suffix thatcan not be incremented . so , a suffix that can not be incremented is one which is as large as it couldpossibly be which means that it is already in descending order . if you look at example that we hadbefore for which we want to define the next permutation , we find this suffix o n m j i these fiveletters are in descending orders so i can not make any larger permutation using this . so , if i fix theletter from d to k then this the largest permutation i can generate with d to k fixed . if i want tochange it and need to increment something and i mean to increment it , i can not increment it withinthis red box so i must extend this to find the shortest suffix namely suffix started with k wheresomething can be incremented . now how do we increment this ? well , what we need to do is thatnow is like say that we have with k we can not do any better so we have to replace k by somethingbigger and the something bigger has to be the smallest thing that we can replace it by , so we willreplace k at the next largest letter to its right namely m. among these letters m n and o are biggerthan k if i replace it by j or i , i will get a smaller permutation which i do not want , so i may replace itm n or o , but among these this m is the smallest i must now start a sequence where the suffix oflength six begins with the letter m. and among suffix that begins with letter m i need the smallestone , that mean i rearrange the remaining letters k o n j i in ascending order to give me the smallestpermutation to begin with m and has the letters k o n j i after it . this gives me this permutation . so , ihave now moved this m here and i have now taken these letters and rearrange them in an ascendingorder to get i j k n o. therefore , this means that for this permutation the next permutation is thisone . so , algorithmically we can do it as follows , what we need to do is first identify the suffix that canbe incremented . we begin by looking for suffix that can not be incremented namely we go backwardsso long as it is in descending order . so we keep looking for values as they increase . so , i is smallerthan j , j is smaller than m , m is smaller than n , n is smaller than o , but o is bigger than k so thatmeans than up to here we have a suffix that can not be incremented and this is the first positionwhere we can make an increment . having done this we now need to replace k by the letter to itsright which is next bigger . now this is a bit like insert we go one by one , we say that k smaller than nso we continue , and we say than k is bigger than j so we stop here . so this tells us that the letter m isthe one we want . we can identify this in one scan , because this remember it is in descending order ,it is in sorted order so we can go through and find the first position where we crossed on somethingbigger than k to something smaller than k and that is the position of the letter that we need tochange . so , it is exactly like inserting something into a sorted list . now having done this , we haveexchange this m and k now we need to put this in ascending order , but remember it was indescending order and what we did to the descending order we replace m by k but what are theproperty of k ? k was smaller than m but bigger than j so , o n k j i remains in descending order . if wewant convert it to ascending order we do not need to sort it we just need to reverse it we justneeded backwards , so this is just the reversal of this . this is a concrete way in all to which find thenext permutation , walk backwards from the end and see when the order stops increasing . so ,wherever we first decrease this that is the suffix that you want to increment , of course if we go allthe way and go back to the first letter and we are not found such a position then we have alreadyreached the last permutation in the overall scheme of things . once we find such a position we findwhich letter to swap it with by doing equivalent of the search that we do for insertion sort . so , we doan insert kind of thing find the position in this case m to swap with k after swapping it we take thesuffix after the new letter we put namely m and we reverse it to get the smallest permutationstarting with that letter m. we were looking at the queens problem , and our solution involvedrepresenting the board , which squares are under attack and placing the queens one by one . onefeature of this solution is that we had to keep passing the board through the functions in order toupdate them or to resize them and i had to initialize them and so on because the board had to keptupdated through each function . now the question is can we avoid passing the board around all overthe place ? so , can we avoid passing this board explicitly or can we have a single global copy of theboard that all the functions can update which will save us passing this board back and forth . so , thisbrings us to a concept of scope . the scope of a name in python is the portion of the code where it isavailable to read an update . now by default in python scope is local to a function , we saw that if weuse a name inside a function and that it is different from using the same name outside the function .but actually this happens only when we update the name inside the function . let us look at thisparticular code . here we have a function f which reads the values x and prints it by storing it in thename y , now the question is what is this x ? well there is an x here . so , will this x inside the functioncorrectly reflect the x outside the function or not . so here we see that function , we have written afile f dot py which contains exactly that code . so , we have function f which reads an x from outsideand tries to print it . if you run this , then indeed it prints the value as we expect , so y gets the valuebecause the x has the value outside and that x is inherited itself a function from inside f . so thisworks . now what if you do this , and this is exactly the same function except that after printing thevalues of y it sets x equal to inside f. now what happens ? so here is f dot py the code in themiddle of the screen , so only difference with respect to f dot py is extra assignment x equal toinside f. now if you try to run f dot py , then it gives us an error saying that the original assignment yequal to x gives us an unbound local name there is no x which is available at this point inside f. so ,somehow assigning x equal to inside f changed the status of x , it is no longer willing to look up theoutside x it will insist that there is an inside x. this gives as an error . so if x is not found in f , python iswilling to look at the enclosing function for a global x. however , if x is updated in f then it becomes alocal name and then it gives an error . so strictly speaking this applies only to immutable values . if wechange this function as follows we made x not an integer , but a list for example and we asked y topick up the th element in the list and then later in f we change the th element of x to . here wehave this function in which we now changed x from an integer to a list and then we try to assign it iny. but we update that list inside the function and then if you run it then it does print the value aswe expect . so this works . if we have an immutable value , i mean mutable value sorry , then we canactually change it inside f and nothing will happen . so , global names that point to mutable values canbe updated within a function . in fact , this means therefore that the problem that we started out tosolve namely how to avoid passing the board around with its inside queens actually requires nofurther explanation . since board is a dictionary , it is a mutable value and in fact we can writequeens in such a way that we just ignore passing the board around , we change all the definitions sothat board does not occur and works fine . here we have rewritten the previous code just removingboard from all the functions . so initialize earlier took board and n now it just takes n print board doesnot taken argument at all and all of them are just referring to this global value board which you cansee everywhere . so , we have this global value board here which is being referred to inside thefunction and it does not matter that is not being passed because this is the mutable value , so it isgoing to look for the value which is defined outside namely this empty dictionary . and then all thesefunctions like place queen or undo queen or add queen just take their relevant parameters andimplicitly refer to the global value of board . so , if you run this now this global version , we get exactlythe same output . so , as we said for our purpose which is to fix that queens problem without havingto pass the board around , the fact that python implicitly treats mutable global names as updatablewithin a function is all that we need . but , what if we actually want a global integer ? why would youwant a global integer ? well , suppose for instance we want to count the number of times a function iscalled . so every time a function is called we would like to update that integer inside this function . butthat integer can not be a local name to the function because that local value will be destroyed in thefunction , we want it to persist , so it must be a value which exists outside the function . but being aninteger it is an immutable value and therefore we try to update it inside the function it will treat it asa local value . so , how do we get around this ? python has a declaration called global , which says aname is to be referred to globally and not taken as a local value . if we change our earlier definition off , so that we add this particular tag global x then it says that this x and this x both refer to the same xoutside . this is the way of telling python , do not confuse this x equal to with creation of a newlocal name x. all x s referred to in f are actually the same as the x outside and to be treated as globalvalues . so , this is one way in which we can make an immutable value accessible globally within apython program . so here is that global code . we have global x , and just make sure that the x is equalto inside is actually affecting that x outside . we have a print x now after the call to f. so thebottom of the main program we have print x , now x was before f was called but x got set toinside f. so , we would except the second print statement to give us . this statement should firstprint . it should print a from the print y and then print from this print x. so , if you run thisindeed this is what we see right we have two lines , the first comes from print y and the secondlevel comes from print x outside . while we are on the topic of local scope , python allows us todefine functions within functions . so , here for instance the function f has defined functions g and h , gof a returns a plus , h of b returns two times b. now we can update y for instance by calling g of xplus h of x rather than just setting it the value x. now , the point to note in this is that these functionsg and h are only visible to f. they are defined within this scope of f. so , they are inside f , and hencethey are not visible outside . so , from outside if i go if i ask g of x at this point this will be an error ,because it will say there is no such g defined . this is useful because now you can define localfunctions which we may want to perform one specialized task which are relevant to f , but it shouldnot be a function which is exposed to everybody else and this is a possibility . of course , the samerules apply so if we look up x inside g or h. so , if we look up an x here it will first try to look up f , if it isnot there in f it will go outside and so on . so , either we will declare it global in which case we canupdate it within g or h or it will use the same rule as before if we do not update an immutable valueit will look outside and if it is a mutable value it will allow us to update it from inside . now there aresome further refinements . python has an intermediate scope called non local which says within gand h refer to the value inside f , but not to the value outside f. this is a technicality and it will not bevery relevant if we need it we will come back it , but for the moment if you want to find out moreabout non local declarations please see the python documentation . but global is the important one ,global allows us to transfer an immutable value from outside in to a function and make it updatablewithin a function . to summarize , what we have seen is that python names are looked up inside outfrom within functions , if we update an immutable value it creates a local copy so we need to have aglobal definition to update immutable values . on the other hand , if you have mutable values like listsand dictionaries there is no problem . within a function we can implicitly refer to the global one andupdate it . and this we saw in our queens solution , we can make the board into a global value andjust keep updating it within each function rather than passing it around explicitly as an argument .finally , what we have seen is that we can nest functions . we can create so called helper functionswithin functions that are hidden to the outside that can be used inside the function to logically breakup its activities in to smaller units . for many problems , we have to search through a set ofpossibilities in order to find the solution . there is no clear solution that we can directly reach . so , wehave to systematically search for it . we keep building candidate solutions one step at a time . now itmight be that the solution that we are trying to get does not work . so , we hit a dead end , and thenwe undo the last step and try the next option . imagine for instance if you are solving a sudoku . so ,you have a grid and then you start filling up things and there are some points you realize that there isnothing you can put here . then you go back and you have to change something you did before . so ,we have to backtrack , we have to go forwards trying to solve the problem and at some point whenwe realize that we are stuck we can not solve the problem again , we have to go back and changesomething we have done before and try something else . one of the classic problems of this kind iscalled eight queens problem . the problem is to place queens on a chess board so that none ofthem attack each other . now , if you have ever played chess , you would know that the queen is a veryspecial piece it can move any number of squares along a row , column or diagonal for instance , if weplace the queen here , in the third row and the third column , then it could move anywhere upwarddown the third column anywhere left or right on the third row , and along the two diagonals on whichthe square three comma three lies . since it can move along these columns it can also capture anypiece that lies along these rows . the queen is said to attack all these squares . the squares to whichthe queen can move are said to be attacked by the queen . so , our goal is to place queens so that ,they do not attack each others , so if we have a queen here then we can not put another queen in anyof the red squares , we have to put it somewhere else . for instance we could put a new queen sayfor instance here this would be ok or here . and then , it if i put a queen here in turn it will attackmore pieces like , it will attack these squares and you rule out some more options so i will not be ableto place queens there and so on . so , we want to see if we can place queens . now we can not placemore than queens because , there are only rows if you place queens , will be in the same rowor the same column and the same column . they will have to attack each other . so , is clearly thelimit , the question is whether we can actually put ? so , we can generalize this question and ask notfor , but n. supposing , i have a chessboard in which there are n rows and n columns . can i place nqueens on such a chessboard ? now for n equal to one the question is trivial , because you only haveto put queen on square . now , it is easy to see that n equal to is impossible because , if i havesquares and wherever , i put a queen say here it will attack all the remaining squares . no matterwhere i put the queen , every other square will be on the row , column or diagonal of that queen . andso there is no possibility of putting a second queen . it turns out that three is also impossible .supposing we start by putting a queen in the top left corner then we will see that it blocks out thefirst column , the first row and the main diagonal . this leaves two slots open for the second queen ,but wherever we put , whichever of the two we put , it will block the other one . once we put a queenin one of those slots the other one is on the same diagonal and there is no free slot for the thirdqueen . so , just by exhaustive analysis we can show that , n equal to three is actually impossible . for nequal to for a by board , it does turn out to be possible . we should not start at the corner , butone of the corners . supposing we put it in the second column , then we get this pattern of blocksquares . then we can find an empty slot on the second row right at the end . so , we put a queenthere it blocks of certain of some more squares in the last column and in that diagonal , but this stillleaves one slot in the third row , unfortunately the third queen does not block the last two slot on thefourth row and we have this kind of symmetric pattern where everything is one of the corner inwhich none of the queens attack each other . now , it turns out that once we cross n equal to , for ,, , , you can show that there is always a solution possible . our task is to find such a solution . howdo we find a solution for n greater than or equal to ? so , as you observed , the first of first thing youknow is that there can be exactly one queen in each row and in each column because queens attackthe column and row on which they lie . if we have two queens on the same row or the same columnthey will necessarily attack each other . since is the classical size of a chessboard let us look atspecifically our example for queens . so , we want to place the queens now row by row . we knowthat there is exactly one queen in each row . let us first put a queen in the first row , then based onthat put a queen in the second row and so on exactly as we did for the by case that we saw in theprevious slide . so , in each row we will place the queen in the first available column , given the queensthat i have already been placed so , far by available we mean a square which is not attacked so far . so ,we start with an by board and in the first row now everything is available . by our analysis we aregoing to put a queen in the first available column , namely the top left once we do this it blocks outthe first row and column and the main diagonal . so , all the shaded squares are now under attack . wemove to the second row and we try to put a queen in the first available column this is the third oneand this in turn will attack another set of rows , columns and diagonal squares . now , we move to thethird row and in the th column we can place a queen . and this one again attacks some squares . so ,we have added some colors to indicate , as each new queen is placed which squares are newly underattack by the new queen , some of them are attacked by multiple queens . for instance the yellowqueen attacks the blue square on the diagonal which was already attacked by the first queen . so , wewill leave it blue for now . in this way we can proceed . so , we put a th queen on the th row , andthen this is a mistake this should be already attacked by this queen and then we will place a thqueen and then a th one and then a th one and now we find that all the squares in the th row areactually blocked . there is no way to extend this solution to put the th queen . so , we have to dosomething about this , we can not place a queen in the th row . since we can not put a place withqueen in the th row we have to go back and change something we did before now . the last thingwe did was to put the th queen right . so , we do that and we find that unfortunately for the thqueen , we had only one choice . so , we have no other choice for the th queen . though the thqueen could not lead to a solution , it was not the choice of the th queen , which actually made aproblem , but it was something earlier . then we go back and try to move the th queen . so , onceagain if you remove the th queen then this unblocks a few squares , but at the same time there wasno other place to place the th queen on the th row . so , again this was a unique choice that we hadmade . now if we go back to the th queen then we find that there is a way to place the th queen . ina different place namely it move it to this slot . so , we can move this th queen to one slot to theright and try again . so , having gone back from the th square and , so th row which is completelyblocked , to the th row which had only one choice , to the th row which had only one choice wecome back to the th row and now we try the next choice for the th row . if we try the next choicefor the th row then we get this pattern of squares and now we see for example , that we can notput a th thing . so , both the choices for the th row actually turn out to be bad . so , you would nowhave to go back and try a different choice for the th row and so on . this is what backtracking is allabout , we keep trying to extend the solution to the next step if we can not we undo the previousmove and try again , and in this way we exhaustively search through all the possible solutions , but wedo it in a systematic way we do not go back and randomly reshuffle some of the choices we madebefore we go back precisely one step and undo the previous steps . so , at each step we have anumber of choices we go through them systematically , for each choice we try to extend the solutionif the solution does not get extended we come back we try the next choice and when we exhaust allchoices at this level we report back to the previous level that we have failed then they will try theirnext choice and so on . the key to backtracking is to do a systematic search through all thepossibilities by going forwards and backwards one level at a time . so , how would we actually encodethis kind of an approach ? specifically , for the queens problem , so our first question is how torepresent the board because a board is what keeps changing as we make moves and undo them . themost obvious way for an n queen solution is to represent the board literally as an n by n grid . andsince python numbers list position from onwards we have an n by n grid and we number thecolumns not to n , but to n minus , so will have rows to n minus and columns to n minus .we can now put a value or or true or false to indicate whether or not there is a queen at thesquare i comma j i is the row , j is the column . so , we can have a two dimensional list , board or list oflists , which has n minus by n minus , to n minus and to n minus as a valid indices and wesay that board i j is to indicate that the queen is at i comma j. and therefore , if it is it indicatesthere is no queen . there are two possible values for every square . of course , we also know thatthere is only one queen per row . this particular thing though it has n minus n into n n squareentries it will only have actually n ones at any given time . so , we can optimize this slightly by justhaving a single list with the entries to n minus where we say that the ith entry corresponds to theith row and we record the column number . so , if board of i is equal to j it means that in row i thequeen is at column j. the queen is at position i comma j. so , with such a data structure this is theoutline of how our strategy works . so , what we have to do is place each queen one at a time . so , weare just writing a function which tries to place a queen in row i given the current state of the board .so , we pass it the current state of the board as one argument and we pass it the row number i thatwe are going to do . so , we would initially start with an empty board and with row . now we runthrough each column and check whether the row column position that is the square i comma c isavailable , if it is available we then put a queen there and we of course , have to update the board . so ,we will come back in a minute , but in our case updating our board just means setting board i equal toc if we have the one dimensional representation . now , if we have actually put the last queen , if i wasn minus then this is the last queen right . so , if it is an queen problem then when we have putqueen number starting from then we are done . so , we can return true however , if this is not thelast queen then we have to continue . so , what we need to do is now with the new board we have toplace one more queen . so , we recursively call this function incrementing the row to i plus one withthe updated board which we have just put and this will return true or false depending on whether itsucceeds or not . so , we record it is return value in the name extend solution . depending on whetherit succeeds or not we check if extend solution is true that is the current position reaches the end .now , when would it be true if it succeeded in going all the way to level n minus and n minusreturns true . so , when n minus returns true then n minus will return true and so on . then ourlevel i will also get the value true . then we can also return true . so , if extend solution returns true wealso return true saying that , so far i am good . on the other hand if extend solution returns false itmeans that given the current position that i chose for row i , nothing more could be done to extendthis to a full solution . this position must be undone . so , we have to undo this move . so , we have towhatever we did earlier to update the board . this update has to be reversed at this point . so , wehave to reverse the effect of putting at i c and then , when we do this we will go back and we will trythe next c and now if we have actually run through all the c s and we have not returned true at anypoint , then python has this else which says that the for loop terminated without coming out inbetween . the for loop terminates normally it means we have run through every possible c that wasavailable and for none of them did we return true that means , that there is no way to currently put aqueen on row i given the board that we have . so , we should return false saying that the board thatwe got is not a good one , then the previous row will now get a false and we try the next position andso on . this is a recursive solution that we get we will see an actual python implementation , but wehave to do a little bit more work to figure out how to actually implement this . the crucial thing in theimplementation that we saw the previous one is , that we have to update the board when we placethe queen and update the board when we undo it and we also have to check whether i c is available .so , we had two representations , a two dimensional representation with s and ones and a onedimensional representation which gives us the column position for each row to keep track of thequeens in the board , but in order to determine whether a square is free or not , we need to have abetter way to compute how the squares are attacked by queens . a simple way would be to just saythat along with a two dimensional representation of the board we denote like we are done pictoriallyin the example we worked out we denote by what we have called this kind of colored squarewhether or not an attack a square is attacked . so , we say attack i j is , if it is attacked by queenotherwise it is . now the problem with this is that a given square i j could be attacked by more thanone queen right . so , when we undo a queen it will obviously , attack many squares , but not all thosesquares become free by removing that queen because , some of the squares are also attacked byother queens which we had placed earlier . so , we need to be careful , when we remove a queen inorder to mark squares which were attacked as being free . well , one way to do this is to actually ,number the queens and record the earliest queen that attacks each square . so , we say attack i j is k ifi j was first attacked by queen k and attack i j is minus one if i j is free . so , when we remove queen kwe reset attack i j with value k to minus and all other squares are still attacked by earlier queens .so , we can explain this very easily with the picture that we had before . here is how we hadrepresented our board when we put the blue queen we marked all squares of the blue queenattacked with blue as blue solid squares then , when we put the red queen we only attack when wemark with red those squares new squares which are attacked for example , this particular square ,which is attacked by both red and blue was already attacked by blue . so , we did not mark it . so , inthis way with each new queen i that we put we only mark the squares which are attacked by queen i .the colors here represent the queen numbers . the blue squares are queen , the red squares arequeen one , the yellow squares are queen two and so on . so , when it comes to undoing it for ainstance , now we want to undo this particular thing now this when we put it had only one whitesquare , there was no free squares other than this . so , we did not add any new attack . so , removing itdoes not actually change anything regarding the attack position only makes that particular squareitself free does not unattack any of the other squares . now , when we remove this orange queen ,then we have to remove all the orange squares which were placed under attack only after adding thisqueen and that turns out to be these two on the bottom row . so , when we undo this one , we willfind those two get undone . similarly when we undo the purple . so , what we are done actually wasprecisely this more efficient implementation of how to keep things how to record what is underattack . so , we are going to now keep an attack array which says that attack i j is k , if it is first attackedby queen k and when we remove queen k we reset to minus one saying that , that square is freeprecisely if the value is currently k. now this would work the only difficulty is that it requires nsquare space , we saw that we could replace the board by a linear thing from a n by n array with sand ones , we could replace it by a single array which had board i equal to be j. the question is canwe replace attack by a linear array now one thing to remember is that though attack itself is an nsquared array attack , undoing the attack does not require as to actually look at all the n squaredentries once we fix the queen to undo , we only have to look along it is row , column and diagonal andremove all entries with the value equal to that queen on that row column and diagonal . the updatesare not a problem the updates are linear , adding and removing a queen only requires us to look at alinear number of cells in this array , but the array itself is quadratic , so can we improve ourrepresentation to use only order n space . to do this we just have to look a little closer at theproblem . so , how many queens attack row i now if we look at the row as a whole remember weplace only one queen in each row and in each column . so , only the queen on row i actually attacksrow i similarly only one queen is in column j. therefore , there is only the queen in column j whichattacks that column . if we look at an individual square then , if we are in the center of this forinstance then this particular square can be attacked from directions , can be attacked from thecolumn in which it is or the row in which it is or it can be attacked from this main diagonal or the offdiagonal . the main diagonal is the one from top left which is called north west and the one , the offdiagonal is the one from the south west . there are possible queens that could be attacking thissquare . there are directions in which a square could be under attack . it might be better torepresent these directions rather than the squares itself the representation we have now is to saythat this particular square is attacked by queen k , but it does not tell us from which direction queen kis attacking right it does not tell us whether queen k is attacking it from the row or the column or thediagonal . so , rows and columns are naturally numbered from to , but how about diagonals . now ifwe look at a diagonal from the north west . let us call these directions north west , south west , northeast and south east . if you look at a decrease in diagonal a diagonal that goes from top to bottom likethis , then what we find as that this difference the column minus the row is something that will be thesame along every square on that diagonal , for instance look at this diagonal it starts here . here thecolumn number is and the row is . minus is , if we go to the next item of the diagonal isminus which is again then minus is again and so on . so , if we go along this diagonal for allthese squares , c minus r where c is the column number and r is a row number the difference isexactly and you can check that nowhere else on the square on this grid is this true , as anotherexample if you look at this particular thing . we have minus four . the difference is minus andsimilarly minus is also minus . so , everything along this particular diagonal has a differenceminus . now , if we look at the diagonals going the other way then we find that the sum is aninvariant here for instance we have either plus or plus or plus and plus , plus and soon . so , along this purple diagonal c plus r is equal to everywhere , and along this green diagonal wehave plus , plus and plus . so , c plus r is equal to . so , we can now conclude that thesquare at position i j is attacked , if it is attacked by queen in row i or in column j or if it is along thediagonal whose difference is j minus i or if is along the diagonal whose difference is j plus i whosesum is j plus i. so , we can now come up with a representation which only keeps track of rows ,columns and diagonals which are under attack and from that we can deduce , whether a square isunder attack . so , we say that row i is , if row i is under attack where i ranges from to n minussimilarly we can have a an array which says column i is attacked and then column i is set toprovided column i is attacked for again i between and n minus . now when we look at thediagonals we have these two types of diagonals . the north west to south east diagonal is the onewhere the difference is the same and if you look at the differences , if you go back then you see thedifferences at this diagonal here , the difference is minus is and here the difference is minusis minus . it goes from plus n minus one to minus n minus .on the other hand , if you go the otherway then the sum at this point is plus is , and the sum over here is plus is . the sum alongthese diagonals are , , , , and so on . this is one this is this is and so on . so , we have thesenorth west to south east diagonals running from minus n minus to n minus this gives me thenumber if at . this is the difference if the difference is say i know which squares are there if thedifference is minus . i know which squares are there and the possible range of values is from minusto plus minus n minus to plus n minus and for the other direction it is from to times nminus in our case two times n minus is two times which is . so , to , but if we have an nby n thing we have two times n minus . this gives us an order n representation of the squaresunder attack . therefore , we look for if we want to see if i j squares under attack we check whether itis row i is one or column j is or j minus , diagonal is or i plus j diagonal is . if any of these is ,then it is under attack if all of these are then is not under attack right . so , i j is free provided row icolumn j the north west to south east diagonal j minus i and the south west to north east diagonal jplus i are all equal to . when we add a queen at i j first we update the board representation to tellus that there is , now the ith row is set to the jth column and for the appropriate row , column anddiagonal corresponding to this square we have to set all of them to be under attack . so , row ibecomes under attack , column j becomes under attack the j minus one th diagonal on the decreasingdiagonal and j plus i th diagonal on the increasing diagonal all get set to one and undo is similarly ,easy we have to first reset the board value to say that the ith queen is not placed . so , we could sayminus one this is not a valid value because the values are to n minus . so , minus indicates thatthe ith queen is not placed at this moment and we reset this row and this column to be equal tobecause , this row and this column are attacked only by this queen . remember we can not have twoqueens on the same diagonal because , they would attack each other . so , at any given point each oneof these rows columns and diagonals is attacked by a single queen and it must be attacked by thequeen at i comma j. so , only the queen at i comma j can attack all of these because , if it was underattacked by another queen we could not placed a queen at i comma j. the fact that this free beforeindicates that all of these got attacked only by the current queen . so , when we remove the currentqueen we must reset them back to . one implementation detail for python is that instead ofkeeping these different data structures , we have a board and a row and a column and all that wekeep it as a single nested dictionary . so , it is convenient to call it board and we will have at the topkey values indicating the sub dictionaries . the queen position we will call the key queen . so ,instead of saying board i is j , we will say board with queen as the key at position i is j then we will sayinstead of row i is or minus we will say that the board at key row is one similarly board at keycolumn board at north west to south east and board at south west to north east . so , we have justconverted it . so , we do not have to pass around different parts to each function we just have topass a single board which is a dictionary which contains everything of interest . remember that this ishow we try to give our solution . so , we wanted to place the queen in row i and for each column thatis available we would try to update the board and so on . now , we have now better ways to do thesethings right . so , we have shown that using these dictionary or these different representations wecan check whether a row and column is available , how to update the board when we place a queenand we undo the queen . here we have an actual python implementation of what we discussed . so ,we have this this function here which is called place queen . place queen we said takes the row i andthe board and the first thing it does it has to determine . what is the value of n ? so , we just take .remember that board is now a dictionary . so , board of queen will tell us how many rows there are inthe thing . if we take the length of the keys of board of queen we get n. this is just way of recoveringn without passing it around . now , what we do is for every possible value from to n minus that isfor j , for all column values we check if i j is free in the current board . if it is free then we add a queenthis is exactly the code that pseudo code we had if , i is n minus we return true otherwise we try toextend the solution by placing a queen at i plus th row . if the solution does extend we return trueotherwise we undo the queen . so , undoing the queen will remove this queen and also update theboard and finally , if this loop goes all the way through for every possible column and does not returntrue then we means it means we can not place the queen on the ith row . so , we return false . now themain function that we have the main code will start off by initializing board to be an emptydictionary , it will ask the user how many queens what kind of board we have n by n. so , rememberwe take the input it will be a string we convert it using int and we record this as n. so , it asks for usnumber converts it to an int and passes it as n then we will initialize the board with the number n .we need n because , we need to know how to set up that remember that the indices run from to nminus or n minus n minus plus n. n is required in order to initialize the dictionary and finally , wetry to place the queen . so , initialization will setup an empty board where nothing is under attackthen we try to place a queen in the th row on this board , if it succeeds then we have a functionwhich prints the board . let us see how these other functions work . let us first look at the functionwhich initializes the board . initializing the board says that first of all for every key for each of thesesub dictionaries queen row column north west south east south west or north east we first set up adictionary with that key . so , this says create an empty dictionary now for three of these things forqueen , row and column right the indices are to n minus . for i in range we just set up the keyvalue i to point to minus in case of queen this says that the queen in row i has not been placed andfor row and column these are the attacked ones which says that they are if they are under notunder attack and one if they are under attack . the initial thing is to say . now , similarly for the northwest to south east the range goes from minus n minus minus n minus to plus n minus . so , fromthe range function since we give the upper bound as n. we set every key in this to similarly for ton into n minus we want to set the south west to north east diagonals to be this is one reasonhere why we are using a dictionary because for the other things of course , we could use a list rightto n minus one is the natural list index , but here we have the strange indices which go from minus nminus one to plus n minus and so on . that is why we use a two level nested dictionary . thisinitializes the board what how do we print a board well for every row we sort the rows . so , we takeboard dot queen dot keys will give us upto n minus in some random order we sort them and foreach such row we print the row and the column number for that row . this happens when we have asuccessful solution . when is a position free well we check whether board the row entry is thecolumn entry is the diagonal entry j minus i is and the diagonal entry j plus i is this is exactly aswe said before and finally , what happens when we add a queen right when we add a queen we haveto place it . so , we set the queen entry for row i to j and then we mark the corresponding row columnand diagonal to be one and when we undo a queen we set the queen entry to be minus and therow column and diagonal entries to be these are all exactly what we wrote in the pseudo codethat has been formalized in python code . now we can run this code and verify that it works . so , herewe have this code queens dot py which is the code that we just saw in the editor . now if i run thiscode as python . queens dot py . this is by the way if you have a python program you can run itdirectly without first invoking it and then importing it if you do this it will ask us how many queenswe want . for instance if we give it the number then we will get the solution that we saw in theearlier example it is not very printed out very neatly . so , if we give the number then we will get onesolution like this the it turns out that you can actually change that print board function i would notshow you the code , but to print it out in a more user friendly way . so , i have another function whichis called pretty if i do this then it shows me the queen solution in a more readable form right . so ,you see exactly the kind of off diagonal positions and if i do for queens then you see there is anextra column . there is some mistake in that , but there is an extra column , but basically you can seethat if you ignore the last column which is showing the position of the queens in the first queensolution . so , it is fairly straight forward once we have got the representation worked out and thestructure of the code worked out , it is very easy to transform it into actual python code . as a finalstep suppose we want not one solution , but all solutions right . so , we do not wants the previousthing in the moment it find a solution then it returns true and then every previous level also returnstrue and eventually it print out the board . supposing we do not want to stop at the first solution , butkeep printing out it is actually much easier then what we do is we just keep going through allpossible positions and whenever we reach the final step if we actually a solution reaches the finalstep then we record it in our case it might print it otherwise we extend it and go to the next one .actually it is much simpler to print all solutions than it is print a single solution because we do nothave to remember whether our solution extends or not it is really running through every possiblesolution . the only thing is that it will not run through every solution to the very end and then decideit does not work . it is not like we are putting all possible queen positions and then trying it out weare trying it out for smaller things , because once we get stuck at say position then it would not tryto extend this it will come back and so on , but this is just a much simpler loop which just prints allsolutions . so , here is the code it 's exactly the same code otherwise the only thing is the place queenfunction is much simpler now , we just try for every j and range one to to n minus , if it is free weadd the queen , if we have reached the last row we print the board , we extend the solution and thenwe undo the queen and try the next one . for every j we are going to first add the queen , if itmanages to place it extend the solution and finally , we are going to undo it and try the next j we 'rejust going to blindly try every possible j and we are not going to ever come out complaining that wehave not succeeded the rest is pretty much the same , the print board has been changed slightly andslight change in the print board is just that we have changed it so that , it will print the entire thing ona single row . so , we have added this thing which says , end equal to space . so , we print the positionsin a single row rather than row by row , that we can see them all . now if we look at the function nowand we try to print it say for queens , then it prints two solutions , these are essentially two rotatedsolutions of the same thing . if we do it for queens for instance then it will actually produce a vastnumber of solutions it turns out there are actually solutions , but even these solutions if youlook at rotations and reflections they come out to be much less , but if you just look at a position ofthe square as it is given to you then , there are different solutions that it prints out . this concludesour discussion of backtracking with respect to the queens ' problem . for the last lecture this weekwe look at some useful things which will crop up and which do not fit anywhere else specific so wejust combined a couple of them into this one single presentation . so , we had an example when weare doing the input and print about how to prompt the user in case they had an invalid entry . wewere trying to read a number and what we said was that we would input some string that the userprovides , so give them a message saying enter the number they provide us with the string and thenwe try to convert it using the int function . and this int function will fail if the user has provided astring which is not a valid integer , in which case we will get a value error . and we get a value error weprint out a message saying try again and we go back . finally , if we succeed , that is this try succeedsthe int works then we will exit from this try block go to the else and the else will break out to of theloops . so , this we had already seen . now the question is , what if we want to change this so that wedo nothing we do not want to do this . in other words if the user does not present a valid valueinstead of telling them why we just keep saying enter a number i mean we have seen this anynumber of times right , you go to some user interface and you type something wrong it does not tellyou what is wrong it just keeps going back and back and back and asking to type again . so , howwould you actually program something as unfriendly as that ? what we want to say is , if i come tothis value error do nothing . now the problem with python is that wherever you put this kind of acolon it expects something after that , you can not have an empty block . so if i put a colon there mustbe at least one statement after that . this is a syntactic rule of python you can not have an emptyblock . but here i want to do nothing , i want to recognize there is a value error and then go back herethat is fine , but i do not want to do anything else . how do i do nothing in python ? so the answer is ,that there is a special statement called pass . pass is a statement which exists only to fill up spaceswhich need to be filled up . so when you have blocks like except or else , if you put the block namethere you can not leave it empty . in this case you can use the word pass in order to do nothing .supposing , i have a list and i want to remove an element from the middle of the list . so one way todo this of course , is to take the slice up to that position this slice from that position then glue themtogether using plus and so on . but what if i want to directly do this . it turns out that that there is acommand called del . if i say del l and what it does is effectively removes l from the current set ofvalues , and this automatically contracts the list and shifts everything from position on wards to theleft by . so let us just verify with this works the way it claims to work . supposing , we set our list tobe the range of values from to , to say , and now i say del l then l becomes , , , , , , ,, , because l was the value remember the position start from . and so it has actually deletedthe value at the fourth position . this also works for dictionaries . if we want to remove the valueassociated with the key k then you can del d k and it will remove the key k and whatever valuesassociated with it and removal from it . so , the key will now it considered being an undefined key . ingeneral we can take a name like x and say del x and what this will do is make x undefined . supposing ,you wrote some junk code like this we set x equal to and then we say del x , and then we ask yequal to x plus . now this point since x has been undefined even though it had a value of thisexpression x plus can not be calculated because x no longer has a value , and what you will end upwith is error that we saw before namely a name error saying that the name x is not defined . howwould you go about checking if a name is defined , well of course you could use exception handling .supposing , we want to assign a vale to a name x only if x is undefined , then we can say try x so this istrying to do something with the x. remember that names can be anything , it could be functions . so ,you can just write x because if it is currently in name of a function which takes no arguments we willtry to execute that function , so it is perfectly valid to just write x. but x if it has no value it will give aname error . so , you can say try x and if you happened to find a name error set it to otherwise leaveit untouched . if x already has a value this will do nothing to x , if x does not have a value then it willupdate the value of x to . now , usually what happens is that we want to check whether somethinghas been defined or not so far . it is not a good idea to just leave it undefined and then use exceptionhandling to do it , because you might actually find strange things happening . so , python provides uswith a special value called none with the capital n , which is the special value used to define nothing an empty value or a null value . we will find great use for it later on when we are defining our owndata structures , but right now just think of none as a special value , there is only one value in noneand it denotes nothing . so , the typical use is that when we want to check whether name has a validvalue we can initialize it to none and later on we can check if it is still none . so , initially we say x isequal to none and finally we go ahead and say , if x is not none then set y equal to x , another words yequal to x is will not be executed if x is still none . now , notice the peculiar word is not . so , we areusing is not equal to . so there is exactly one value none in python in the space . all nones point to thesame thing . remember was checking when we say l is l , we are checking whether l and l pointto the same list object . we were asking whether x and the constant none point to the same noneobject and there is only one value none . so , x is none as the same as x equal to equal to none , so x isnot none is the same as x not equal to none . so , x is not none is much easier to read the next notequal to none . that is why we will write it this say . what we have seen our three useful things whichwe will use from time to time as we go along . one is the statement pass which is the specialstatement that does nothing and can be used whenever you need an empty block . then we saw thecommand del which takes the value and undefined it . the most normal way to use del is to removesomething from a list or a dictionary , you would not normally want to just undefine name which isholding simple value . but from a dictionary or a list we might want to remove a key or if might wantto remove a position and del is very useful for that . finally , we have seen that there is a special valuenone which denotes a null value , it is a unique null value and this can be used to initialize variables tocheck whether they have been assigned sensible values later in the code . when we looked at inputand print earlier in this week s lectures , we said that we could control in a limited way how printdisplayed the output . now by default print takes a list of things to print , separates them by spacesand puts a new line at the end . however , it takes an optional argument end equal to string whichchanges what we put at the end , in particular if we put an empty string it means that it does not starta new line , so the next print will continue on the same line . similarly we can change the separatorfrom a space to whatever we want and in particular if we do not want any spaces we can put themourselves and just say the separator is nothing the empty string . now , sometimes you want to be alittle bit more precise , so for this we can use the format method which is actually part of the stringlibrary . so the set of things that we can do with strings , last , in the previous lecture we looked atother things we can do string like , find , replace and all this things , so this is like that , it is in the sameclass . remember when you are doing print , you are actually printing a string . so , anything you can doto modify a string will give you another string that is what you are going to print . so , the string hereis actually going to call a format method . so , the easiest way to do this is by example . we have a basestring here , which is first , second and we have these two funny things in braces . the funny things inbraces are to be thought of as the equivalent of arguments in the function , these are things to bereplaced by actual values and then what happens is that when you give this string and you apply theformat method then the refers to the first argument and refers to the second argument . so whatwe are doing is , we are replacing by position , so if i actually take this string and i pass it to python theresulting thing is first colon , second colon , because the first argument , the brace is replacedby the first argument to format and the second replaces the second . now the positions determinethe names so they do not have to be used in the same order . so , we could first print argument andthen print argument as the second example shows . essentially , this version of format allows us topass things into a string by their position in the format thing . so we are replacing arguments byposition . now we can do the same thing by name . this is exactly like defining a function whereremember , we said that we could give function arguments and we could pass it by name . so , in sameway here we can specify names of the arguments to format , we can say f is equal to , s is equal to, that is first and second . now we can say one f and two s. now here the advantage is not byposition but by name . if i take these two things and i exchange them , so if i make f the secondargument and s the first argument , and i pass it to the same string then f will be correctly caught asand s as , so here by using the name not the position . so , the order in which you supply thethings to format does not matter . so , up to this point we have not done any formatting . all we havedone is we have taken a string and we have told us how to replace values for place holders in thestring . there is no real formatting which has happened because whatever we did with that we couldhave already done using the existing print statement that we saw . now the real formatting comes bygiving additional instructions on how to display each of these place holders . so here we havefollowed by some funny thing , we have this special colon and what comes after the colon is theformatting instruction . this has two parts here , we see a and a d and they mean different things . sothe d as a whole tells us how to display the value there is going to be passed here , that is the firstthing . d is a code that specifies , i think it stands for decimal , so d specifies that should be treated asan integer value . so , we should actually display it as a normal integer value namely it 's a base teninteger . finally , says that we must format so that it takes three spaces . it occupies the equivalentof three spaces though it is a single digit . so if i do all this , then what happens is i get value , nownotice that already there is one space here , then it going to take three spaces so i am going to gettwo blank spaces and then a , so that is why we have this long , so this is actually three blank spacesand then a . this whole thing , this part of it comes from the format . so i have a blank space , a blankspace and a , because i was told to put in a width of and think of it as a number , so since itsnumber it goes to right hand . let us look at another example . supposing , i had number which is notan integer , but a floating point number , so it is . . now here first thing is that we have instead ofd we have f for floating point . so , f , . f , this whole thing to the right of the colon tells me how toformat the values comes from here . . f breaks up as follows the f , the letter part of it always tellsme what the type of value is . so , it says that . should be treated as a floating point value . andthe second thing is that it says this tells me how much space i have to write whatever i have towrite . so it says the total value including the decimal point , everything is going to be characterswide . finally , the says how many digits to show after the decimal point . if i apply all this then firstof all because i have only two digits after decimal point this gets knocked off , and then because it sset to use character , now if i count from the right , this is , , , , characters but it s set to usecharacters , that is why there is an extra blank here . if you notice here , there is only one blank , buthere there are two blanks . the second blank comes from the format statement . unfortunately this isnot exactly user friendly or something that you can easily remember , but there are codes for othervalues . we saw f and d , so there are codes like s for string , and o for octal , and x for hexadecimal . allthese values can be displayed also using these formatted things . and you can also do other thingsyou can tell it not to put it on the right put it on the left , so you can left justify the value . in a field ofwidth for example , if you want to put a string you might say the string should come from the left ,not from the right . then you can add leading zeroes , so you might to display a number not in widthnot as , but as . so , all these things you can do . as i said this is a whole zoo of formattingthings that you can do with this . these all have their origin from the language c and the statementcalled printf in c , so the exact format statements in our , d and . f and all what they mean . it isbest that you look up python documentation , you may not need all variations of it , the ones that youneed you can look up when you need them , but it is useful to know that this kind of formatting canbe done . the last lecture we saw how to read and write text files . and reading and writing textinvariably involves processing the strings that we read and write . and so , python has a number ofstring processing functions that make it easier to modify this content . so usually , you are reading andwriting files in order to do something with these files , and to do something with this you can usebuilt in string functions which are quite powerful . among other things , what you can do with thesestring functions is for example , search for text or search and replace it . a typical use of stringprocessing for a file is when we take something like a spread sheet and export it as text . there issomething called a comma separated value format csv , where the columns are output separated bycommas as text . now , what we can do with a string file is to read such a file line by line and in eachline extract the columns from the text by reading between the commas . so , we will see all this in thislecture . the first example of a string command that we already saw last time is the commands tostrip white space right . we have rstrip , which we used for example to remove the trailing whitespacebackslash n in our lines , and we had lstrip to remove leading whitespace , and we had strip whichremoves it on both directions . let us see how this works . let us create a string which as whitespacebefore and afterwards , so let us put some spaces may be a tab and then the word hello and then twotabs . we have a string which has whitespace and you can see the tabs are indicated by backslash tand blanks . now , if we want to just strip from the right we say t is equal to s dot rstrip . rememberthis strip command strings are immutable right it wo n't change s it will just return a new string , if isay t is s dot r strip it will strip to the whitespace to the right and give me t , if i look at t it haseverything up to hello but not that tab and the space afterwards . similarly , if i say t is s dot l strip itwill remove the ones to the left now t will start with hello , but it will read have the whitespace at theend . finally , if i say t is s dot strip then both sides are gone and i will just get the word that i want .this is useful because when you ask people to type things and forms for example , usually if theyleave some blanks before and after , so if you want everything before the first blank to be lost and thelast blank only keep the text in between then you can use the combination of lstrip , rstrip or just stripto extract the actual data that you want from the file . the next thing that may we want to do is tolook text in a string . there is a basic command called find . so , if s a string and pattern is anotherstring that i am looking for in s , s dot find pattern will return the first position in s which patternoccurs . and if pattern does not occur , so the positions will there obviously be between and thelength of s minus . we already wrote some our own implementation of this earlier . so , if it does notoccur it will give you minus . sometimes you may not want to search entire string , so pattern takesan optional pair of argument start and end in which case instead of looking for the pattern from theentire string it looks at a slice from start to end with the usual convention that this is the positionfrom start to end minus . there is another version of this command called index . and the differencebetween find and index is what happens when the pattern is not found . in find when the pattern isnot found you get a minus , in index when the pattern is not found you get a special type of error inthis case a value error . so again let us just see how these things actually work . so , we have a stringhere s which contains the word brown fox grey dog brown fox . now if i ask it to look for the firstoccurrence of the word brown , then it will return the position because it is right there at thebeginning of string . if on the other hand i do not want this position , but i wanted to say starting fromposition and going to length of s for example , then it will say and if you count you will find thatthe second occurrence of brown is at position . if on the other hand i look for something which isnot there like cat then find will return minus , so minus is not the error but the indication thatthe string was not found . the difference with index is that if i give index the same thing instead of aminus it gives me a value error saying the substring does not occur right this is how find and indexwork . the next natural thing after searching is searching and replacing . if i want to replace somethingi give it two strings what i am searching for and what i am replacing it with and it will return a copy ofs with each occurrence of the first string replaced by the second string . now this can be controlled inthe following ways supposing , i do not want to each occurrence , but i only want say the firstoccurrence or the first three occurrences . so , i can give it an optional argument saying how manysuch occurrences starting from the beginning should be replaced . it says replace at most the first ncopies and notice that like and strip and all that , here it 's because changing this string replacingsomething by something else , is not that s is going to change because strings are immutable is goingto return us the transform string . so let us look at an example . once again let us see our old examples is brown fox grey dog brown fox and now supposing i want to replace brown by black , then iget 'black fox grey dog black fox . ' if i say only want to be replaced then i get 'black fox grey dog 'where the second brown is left unchanged . now you may ask what happens if i have this pattern itdoes not neatly split up if i have the different copies of brown overlaps . supposing , i have somestupid string like abaaba and now i say replace all aba by say dd . now the question is , will itfind two aba s or aba , because there is an aba starting at position , there is also an aba in thesecond half of the string starting at position . the question is will it mark both of these and replacethem by dd , well , it does not because it does it sequentially so it first takes the first aba , replaces itby dd , at this point the second aba has been destroyed . so it will not find it . whereas , if i had forinstance two copies of this disjoint then it would have correctly found this and given me dd followedby dd . so , there is no problem about overlapping strings it just does it from right to left and it makessure that the overlap string is first written , so it will not the second copy will not get transformed .the next thing that we want to look at is splitting a string . now when we take a spreadsheet andwrite it out as text , usually what happens is that we will have an output which looks like this . the firstcolumn would be written followed by comma then second column , so if we had three columns thenthe first column set second column set and the third was string hello , then we write it out a textas you will get , and hello . actually hello is a bit of problem because it has double quotes letus not use hello let us use something simpler . so let us just say that we had three numbers , andfor example . now , what we want to do is we want to extract this information . so , we want to extractthe individual , and that we had as three values . so what we need to do is look for this textbetween the strings , so we want to split the column into lines into chunks between the commas andthis is done using the split command . so , split takes a string s and takes a character or actually couldbe any string and it splits the columns it gives you a list of values that come by taking the partsbetween the commas . so , up to the first comma is a first thing . so columns is just a name that wehave used , it could be any list . the first item of the list will be up to the first comma then betweenthe first and second comma and so on and finally after the last comma . comma in this case is not avery special thing you can split using any separator string . and again just like in replace we couldcontrol how many times we replaced , here we can also control how many splits you make . so , youcan say split according to this string notice that this could be any string so here we are splitting itaccording to space colon space . but we are saying do not make more than n chunks , if we have morethan n columns or whatever chunks which come like this beyond a certain point we will just lump itas one remaining string and keep it with us . so again let us see how this works . suppose this is ourline of text which i will call csv line it is a sequence of values separated by commas notice it is astring . now if i say csv line dot split using comma as a separator and then i get a list of values thestring , the string , the string . remember this is exactly like what we said about input it does notget you the values in the form that you want you then have to convert them using int or these arestill strings . so , it just takes a long string and splits it into a list of smaller strings . now here there arethree elements so if i say for example i only want position , , . so , if i say i only wanted to do itonce then i get the first , but then and does not get split because it only splits once . now , if ichange this to something more fancy like say hash comp question mark . so now i have a differentseparator it 's not a single character , but hash question mark then i can say split according to hashquestion mark and this will give me the same thing . you can split according to any string it 's just auniform string . there are more fancy things you can do with regular expression and all that , but wewo n't be covering that for now . as long as you have a fixed string which separates your thing you cansplit according to that fixed string . so , the inverse operation of split would be to join strings .supposing , we have a collection of strings and i want to combine it in to a single string separate eachof them by a given separator . so as an example , supposing we take s which is some csv output andwe split it into columns on comma , and then we can take join string and set it to the value commaand then use that to join the columns . now this is a bit confusing , so join is a function which isassociated with a string . in this case a string in concerned is a comma . so it says , more or less you aresaying comma dot join columns which is use comma to join columns . so , you have just given it aname here join string is equal to comma and then csv line is join string dot join columns . so whatthis says is , use comma to separate so if at the end of this i had got like last time , and , then thiswill now put them back as comma comma into a single string . here is another example , herewe have a date a month and a year given as strings and i want to string it together into adate like we normally use with hyphens . here instead of giving an intermediate name to the hyphensand then saying hyphens dot join i directly use this string itself , just want to illustrate that you candirectly use this joining string itself as a constant string and say use this to join this list of values . allyou need to make sure is what you have inside the join in the argument is a list of strings and whatyou applied to is the string which will be used to join them . let us just check that this works the waywe actually intended to do . let us directly do the second example . supposing , we say date is ,remember these are all strings month is , year is , and now i want to say what is the effect ofjoining these three things using dash as separator and i get dash dash . so there are manyother interesting things you can do with strings for example , you can manipulate upper case andlower case . if you say capitalize , what it will do is it will convert the first letter to upper case and keepthe rest as lower case , if you say s dot lower it will convert all upper case to lower case , if you say sdot upper it will convert all lower case to upper case and so on . there are other fancy things like sdot title . so , title will capitalize each word . this is how it normally appears say in the title of a book ora movie . s dot swap case will invert lower case to upper case and upper case to lower case and soon . so there are whole collection of functions in the string thing which deal with upper case , lowercase and how to transform between these . the other thing that you can do with strings is to resizethem to fit what you want . so if you want to have a string which is positioned as a column of certainwidth then we can say that center it in a block of size n. so what this will do is it will return a newstring which is of length n with s centered in it . now by centering what we mean is that on eitherside there will be blanks instead of blanks you can put anything you want like , stars or minuses . youcan give a character which will be used to fill up the empty space on either side rather than a blank .now you may not want it centered or you may not want to the left or the right , so you can forexample left justify during ljust or rjustify during rjust and again you can give an optional characterand so on . s , we can just check one or two of these just to see how they work . suppose , we take ashort string like 'hello ' and now we center it in a large block of say . we say s dot center , thenthis gives us hello with a lot of blank spaces on either side . now we can replace those blank spacesby anything we want , so say minus sign then we will get a string of a minus signs or hyphens beforethat . now we can also say that i want the thing left justified in this not a center . so if i do that then iwill get hello at the beginning and a bunch of minus signs , similarly with rjust and so on . some of theother types of functions which we find associated to strings are to check properties of strings . does sconsists only of the letters a to z and capital a to capital z. so that is what s dot is alpha says is it analphabetic string , if it is true it means it is , if it is not it has at least one non alphabetic character .similarly is it entirely digits , is numeric will tell us if it is entirely digits . so , there is a huge number ofstring functions and there is no point going through all of them in this thing , we will if we need themas we go along we will use them and explain them . but you can look at the python documentationlook under string functions and you will find a whole host of useful utilities which allow you to easilymanipulate strings . and this is one of the reasons that python is a popular language because you cando this kind of easy text processing . so you can use it to quickly transform data from one format toanother and to you know change the way it looks or to resize it and so on . string functions are anextremely important part of pythons utility as a glue language for transforming things from oneformat to another . in the last lecture we saw how to use the input and print statements to collectinput from the standard input that is the keyboard , and to display values on the screen using print .now , this is useful for small quantities of data , but we want to read and write large quantities ofdata . it is impractical to type them by hand or to see them as a scroll pass in this screen . so , for largedata we are forced to deal with files which reside on the disk . so , we have to read a large volume ofdata which is already written on a file in the disk and the output we compute is typically return backinto another file on the disk . now , one thing to keep in mind when dealing with disks is that disk readand write is very much slower than memory read and write . to get around this most systems willread and write data in large blocks . imagine that you have a large storage facility in which you storethings in big cartons . now , when you go and fetch something you bring a carton at a time even if youare only looking for , say one book in that carton , you do not go and fetch one book out of the cartonfrom the storage facility , you bring the whole carton and then when you want put things back againyou assemble them in a carton and put them back . in the same way , the way that data flows backand forth between memory and disk is in chunks called blocks . so , even if you want to read only onevalue or only one line it will actually a fetch large volume of data from the disk and store it in what iscalled a buffer and then you read whatever you need from the buffer . similarly , when you want towrite to the disk you assemble your data in the buffer when the buffer is enough quantity to bewritten on the disk then one chunk of data or block is written back on the disk . when we read andwrite from a disk the first thing we need to do is connect to this buffer . this is called opening a file .so , when we open a file we create something called a file handle and you can imagine that this is likegetting access to a buffer from which data from that file can read into memory or written back . now ,having opened this file handle everything we do with the file is actually done with respect to this filehandle . so , we do not directly try to read and write from the disk , instead we read and write fromthe buffer that we have opened using this file handle and finally , when we are done with ourprocessing we need to make sure that all the data that we have written goes back . so , this is done byclosing the file . so , closing the file has two effects the first effect is to make sure that all changes thatwe intended to make to the file . any data we want to write to the file is actually taken out to thebuffer and put on to the disk and this technically called flushing the buffer . so , closing a file flushesthe output buffer make sure that all rights go back to the file and do not get lost and the secondthing it does is that it in some sense makes this buffer go away . so , it disconnects the file handle thatwe just set up . now , this file is no longer connected to us if we want to read or write it again we haveto again open it . the command to open a file is just open . the first argument that you give open isthe actual file name on your disk . now , this will depend a little bit on what system you are using , butusually it has a first part and an extension . this commands , for instance , to open the file gcd dot py .now implicitly , if you just give a file name it will look for it in the current folder or directory whereyou running the script . so , you can give a file name which belongs to the different part of yourdirectory hierarchy by giving a path and how you describe the path will depend on whether you areworking on windows or unix , what operating system you are using . now , you see there is a secondargument there , which is letter r . this tells us how we want to open the file . so , you can imaginethat if you are making changes to a file by both reading it and writing it , this can create confusion . so ,what we have to do is decide in advance whether we are going to read from a file or write to it , wecan not do both . there is no way we can simultaneously read from a file and modify it while it isopen . so , read is signified by r . now , write comes in two flavors , we might want to create a new filefrom scratch . in this case we use a letter w . so , w stands for write out a new file , we have to be bitcareful about this because if we write out a file which already exits then opening it with more w willjust overwrite the contents that we already had . the other thing which might be useful to do is totake a file that already exists and add something to it . this is called append . so , we have two writingmodes w for write and a for append . what append will do is it will take a file which already existsand add the new stuff the writing at the end of the file . once we have a file open , let us see how toread . so , we invoke the read command through the file handle . this is like some of the otherfunction that you saw with strings and so on , where we attach the function to the object . so , fh is thefile handle we opened , we want to read from it . so , we say fh dot read , what fh dot read does is itswallows the entire contents the file as a single string and returns it and then we can assign it to anyname , here we use the name contents . so , contents is now assigned the entire data which is in thefile handle pointed by fh in one string . now , we can also consume a file , we are typically dealing withtext files . so , text file usually consists of lines think of python code , for example , we have lines afterlines after lines . a natural unit is a bunch of texts which is ended with new line character . if youremember this is what the input command does , the input command waits for you type somethingand then you press return which is a new line and whatever you type up to the return is thentransmitted by input as a string to the name that you assigned to the input . so , readline is like that ,but the difference between the readline and input is that , when you read a line you get the last newline character along with the input string . when you say input you only get the characters whichcome before the last new line the new line is not included , but in readline you do get the new linecharacter . so , you have to remember that you have the extra character floating around at the end ofyour string . so , this is conventionally the noted backslash n. the backslash n is a notation whichdenotes a single character even though looks two characters . this is supposed to be the new linecharacter . now , the actual new line character differs on operating systems from one to the other , butin python if we use backslash n and it will correctly translated in all the systems that you are using .the third way that you can read from a file is to read all the lines one by one into a list of strings . so ,instead of readline , if i say readlines then it reads the entire the files as a list of srings . each string isone item in the list and remember again each of these lines has the backslash n included . so , read ,readline and readlines , none of them will actually remove the backslash n. they will remain faithfullyas part of your input . in other words , if you are going to transfer this from one file to another , you donot want to worry reinserting the backslash n because this is already there . so , you can use this inputoutput directly , but on the other hand , if you want to do some manipulation of the string then youmust remember this backslash n is there and you must deal with it appropriately . reading files isinherently a sequential operation . now , of course , if we use the basic command read , it reads theentire content . so obviously , it reads from beginning to the end , but if you are reading one line at atime then the way it works is that when we open the file we are initially at the beginning of the file .so , you can imagine a pointer like this red arrow which tells us where we are going to read next . so ,initially when we open we are going to read from the beginning , now each readline takes us forward .if i do a readline at this point it will take me up to the next backslash n. remember a line is a quantitywhich is delimited by backslash n. so , we could have a line which has characters , next line couldhave characters and so on . it is from one backslash n to the next is what a line , so this is not a fixedlink . so , we will move forward reading one character at a time until we have backslash n , theneverything up to the backslash n will be returned as the effect to a string return by the readline andpointer move to the next character . now , we do another readline possibly of different line again thepoint to move forward . so , in this way we go from beginning to the end . in case we want to actuallydivert from the strategy there is a command seek , which takes a position , an integer n , and movesdirectly to the position n regardless of where you are . this is one way to move back or to jumparound in a file other than by reading consecutively line by line . finally , we can modify the readstatement to not to read the entire file , but to read a fix number of characters . now , this may beuseful if your character actually your file actually consists of fix blocks of data . so , you might havesay , for example , pan numbers which are typically characters long and you might have just storedthem as one long sequence of text without any new lines knowing that every pan number ischaracters . so , if we say fh dot read , it will read the next pan number and keep going and this willsave you some space in the long run . so , there are situation where you might exploit this where youread a fix number of characters . when we are reading a file incrementally , it is useful to know whenthe file is over because we may not know in advance how long files is or how many lines of file is . so ,if you are reading a file line by line then we may want to know when the file has ended . so , there aretwo situations where we will know this . so , one is if we try to read using the read command and weget nothing back , we get an empty string that means the file is over , we have reached end of file .similarly , if we try to read a line and we get empty string it means we reached the end of file . so ,read or readline if they return empty string its means that we have reached the end of the file .remember , we are going sequential from beginning to the end . so , we reached the end of the fileand there is nothing further to read in this file . having read from a file then the other thing that wewould like to do is to write to a file . so , here is how you write to a file just like you have read acommand you have a write command , but now unlike read which implicitly takes something fromthe file and gives to you , here you have to provide it something to put in the file . so , write takes anargument which is a string . when you say , write s says take the string s and write it to a file . now ,there are two things one is this s may or may not have a backslash n , it may have more than onebackslash n. so , is nothing tells you this is one line part of a line more than a line you have to write saccording to the way you want it to be written on the file , if you want it to be in one line you shouldmake sure it ends with a backslash n. and this write actually returns the number of characterswritten . now , this may seem like a strange thing to do , why should it tell you because you know fromthe length of s what is number of character is written , but this is useful if , for instance , the disk is full .if you try to write a long string and find out only part of the string was written and this is a indicationthat there was a problem with the write . so , it is useful sometimes to know how many charactersactually got written out of the characters that tried to write . the other thing which writes in bulk to afile is called writelines . so , this takes list of strings and writes them one by one into the file . nowthough it says write lines these may not actually be lines . so , its bit misleading the name if you wantto them in lines you must make sure that you have each of them terminated by backslash n. if theyare not then they will just cascade to form a long line thing . so , though it says writelines it should bemore like write a list of strings , that should , that is a more appropriate name for this function , it justtakes a list of strings and writes it to the file pointed to by the file handle . and finally , as we said oncewe are done with a file , we have to close it and make sure the buffers that are associated with thefile , especially if you are writing to a file that they are flushed . so , fh dot close , will close the filehandle fh and all pending writes at this point are copied out to the disk . it also now means that fh isno longer associated with the file we are dealing with . so , after this if we try to invoke operation onfh it is like having undefined name in python . now , sometimes there are situations where we mightwant to flush the buffer without closing the file . we might just want to make sure that all writes upto this point have been actually reflected on the disk . so , there is a command flush which does this .in case we say flush , it just say if there are any pending writes then please put them all on to the disk ,do not wait for the risk drives to accumulate until the buffer is full and then write as you normallywould to the disk . here is a typical thing that you would like to do in python , which is to process itline by line . the natural way to do this is to read the lines into a list and then process the list usingfor . so , you say content is fh dot readlines and then for each line and contents you do something withit . you can actually do this in a more compact way , you can get do away with the name contents andjust read directly every line return by the function fh dot readlines . so , this is the equivalentformulation of the same loop . as an example , for how to use this line by line processing , let usimagine that we want to copy the contents of a file input dot txt to a file output dot txt . so , the firstthing we need to do is to make sure that we open it correctly . we should actually open outfile withmode w and in file mode r . this tells that i am going to read from infile and write to outfile . now ,for each line in returned by readlines on infile , remember that when i get line from readline thebackslash n is already there , if i do not do anything to the backslash n , i can write it out the exactlythe same way . so , for each line that i read from the list infile dot readlines i just write it to outfile andfinally , i close both the files . this is one way to copy one file from input to output . of course , we cando it even in one shot because there is a command called writes lines , which takes the list of stringsand writes them in one shot . so , instead of going line by line through the list readlines we can takethe entire list contents and just output it directly through writelines , this is an alternative way wherei have replaced . this is basically replacing the for . so , instead of saying for each line in infiles i can justwrite it directly out . one of the things we are talking about is this new line character which is a bit ofannoyance . if we want to get with a new line character , remember this is only a string and the newline character is going to be a last character in this string . so , one way to get is just to take slice of thestring up to , but not including the last character . now , remember that we when we count backwardsminus is the last character . if we will take the slice from up to minus then it will correctlyexclude the last character from the string . so , s is equal to line colon minus , will take the line andthe strip of the last character which is typically backslash n that we get , when we do readlines . now ,in general we may have other spaces . so , remember when you write out text very often we can notsee the spaces the end of the line because they are invisible to us . these are what are called whitespace . so spaces , tabs , new lines , these are characters which do not display on the screen , especiallyspaces and tabs and there at a end of line , we do not know the line ends with the last character wesee there are spaces after words . so , r strip is a string command which actually takes a string andremoves the trailing white space , all the white spaces are at end of the line . in particular there is onlya backslash n and it will strip to a backslash n. it also strips to other jump there is some spaces andtabs before the backslash n and return that . so , s equal to line dot r strip that is strip line from theright of white space . this is an equivalent thing to the previous line except it is more general becausestrips all the white space not just by the last backslash n , but all the white spaces end of the line . wecan also strip from the left using l strip or we can strip on both sides if we just say strip without anycharacterization l or r. these are the string manipulation functions and we will look at some more ofthem , but this is just useful one which has come up immediately in the context of file handling . so ,before we go ahead let us try and look at some examples of all these things that we have seen so far .we have created a file called input dot txt which consist of a line , the quick brown fox jumps over thelazy dog . now , let us open the python interpreter and try to read lines from this file and print it out .so , we can say , for instance , that f is equal to open input dot txt in read . now , i have opened the fileand now i can say , for instance , for line in f dot readlines print line . now , you will see somethinginteresting happening here , you will see that we have now a blank line between every line our file .now , why is there blank lines between every line in our file that is because when we readlines we geta backslash n character from the line itself . so , the quick brown , the first line end with the backslashn , fox end with backslash n and then over and above that if you remember the print statement addsa backslash n of its own . so , actually print is putting out to blank lines for each of these . now , let ustry and do this again , supposing i repeat this thing and now i do this again , now nothing happens thereason nothing happens is because we had this sequential reading of the file . so , the first time wedid f dot readlines , it read one line at a time and now we are actually pointing to the end of the file .if for instance , at this point we were to say text equal to fh dot read , sorry f dot read , then text willbe empty string . this is the indication that we have actually reached the end of the file . similarly , ifwe try to say readline again text will be empty string . so , remember we said that if read or readlinesreturns the empty string then we have reached the end of the file . the only way we can undo this isto start again by closing the files . so , what we say is f dot close . this closes of the file . now , if you tryto do f dot read then we will get an error saying that this is not being defined . so , we do not have fwith us anymore . so , again we have to say f is open input dot txt r and now we can say while for linein f dot readlines for each line . supposing , we now use that trick that we had last time which is to sayend equal to empty string that says do not insert anything after each print statement . now , if you dothis you see we get back to exactly the input files as it is without the extra blank lines because print isno longer creating these extra lines . let us say we want to copy input dot txt to a output dot txt , wesay f is equal to open input dot txt r as before and we say g is equal to open output dot txt w andnow we say for line in f dot readlines , g dot write line . now , notice you get the sequence of numberswhy do we get a sequence of numbers that is because each time we write something it returns anumber of character written and it will turn out , if you look at the lines quick brown fox , etcetera , forexample , the second line is just fox , fox has three letters , but if you include the backslash n its wroteletters . that is why quick brown was letters plus a backslash n , fox was a plus backslash n. so ,this is line by line . now , if i correctly close these files then come out of this , then output dot txt isexactly the same as input dot txt . to summarize what we have seen is that , if you want to interactwith files we do it through file handles , which actually corresponds to the buffers that we use tointeract between the memory and the file on the disk . we can open a file in one of three modesread , write and append . we did not actually do an example with the append , but we do appendwhat it will do , keep writing beyond where the file already existed , otherwise write will erase the fileand start from the beginning . we saw that read , readline and readlines , using this we can read theentire file in one shot of the string or read it line by line . similarly , we can either write a string or wewrite a list of strings too . so , we have a write command in a writelines and writelines are morecorrectly to be interpreters write list of strings . finally , we can close the handle when we have doneand in between that we can flush the buffer by using flush command and we also saw that there aresome string operations to strip white space and this can be useful to remove these trailing backslashn which come whenever you are processing text files . till now , all the programs that you have beenasked to write in your assignments have actually been just functions . these are functions , which arecalled from other pieces of python code and return values to them . now , when you have a standalone python program , it must interact with the user in order to derive inputs and produce outputs .let us see , how python interacts with its environment . the most basic way of interacting with theenvironment is to take input from the keyboard and display output to the screen . traditionally , thesemodes are called standard input and standard output . so , standard input just means , take the inputfrom the keyboard or any standard input device like that and standard output just means display theoutput directly on the screen . the basic command in python to read from the keyboard is input . if weinvoke the function input with no arguments and assign it to a name , then , the name user data willget the value that is typed in by the user at the input command . remember that , it reads a line ofinput . the way that the user signals that the input is over , is by hitting the return button on thekeyboard and the entire sequence of characters up to the return , but not including the return , istransmitted as a string to user data . now , of course , if the program is just waiting for you for input , itcan be very confusing . so , you might want to provide a prompt , which is a message to the user ,telling the user , what is expected . so , you can provide such a thing by adding a string as an argumentto the input . if you put an argument to input like this , then , it is a string which is displayed when theuser is supposed to input data . now , this string is displayed as it is . so , you can make appropriateadaptations to make it little more user friendly . we will see an example in a minute , but you mightwant to leave a space or you might want to insert a new line . basically , you use the input commandto read one line of input from the user and you can display a message to tell the user what isexpected of him . so , here is what happens if i just say userdata is equal to input , the pythonprogram will just wait and now , as a user who does not know what is expected , we do not knowwhether it is processing something or it is waiting for input . now , it so turns out that , if we typesomething and press enter , it will come back . now , if i ask for the contents of the name userdata , itwill be impact me the string of things that i had typed . so , providing an input prompt without amessage can be confusing for the user . so , what we said was , we might want to say something like ,provide an input like this . now , it provides us with a message , but the number that we type forinstance , is stuck to the message . it is not very readable . so , userdata is indeed not a number , now , itis a string as we will see in a minute . but the fact is that , we did not get any space or anything else . itlooks a bit ugly . so , what we said is that you can actually , for instance , put a colon and a space so thatthe message comes like this . now , this is a slightly nicer prompt and you could also pfirefut a newline if you want , which is signalled by this special character , backslash n. now , the message comesand then , you type on a new line and in all cases , the outcome is the same userdata , the name towhich you are reading the input , becomes set to the string that is typed in by the user . if i do it againand if i type in something else like , for example , then userdata becomes the string . so , youcan use input with a message and make the message as readable as you can . as we saw , when wewere playing with the interpreter , the input that is read by the function input is always a string . evenif you say , enter a number and the user types in a number , this is not actually a number . if you wantto use it as a number , you have to use this type conversion . remember , we have these functions int ,str and so on . so , we have to use the int function to type convert whatever the user has typed , to aninteger . now , of course , remember that , if the user types some garbage , then you get an error , right .if the user does not type some , something valid , then you will get an error . so , what we can do is , wecan use exception handling to deal with this error . so , what we can say is , try userdata . this is thecode that we had before those lines . so , what we want to say is , we will try these lines , but if theuser types something which is not a number , then , we are going to ask him to type it again and it willturn out that , that type of error in python is called a value error . so , you can verify this by going tothe python interpreter and checking . in the python interpreter , if we try to apply int to somenonsensical things , then we get a value error . so , what we are trying to say is that , if we get a valueerror , we want to take appropriate action . so , we have this try block and if we see a value error , whatwe do is , we print a message . now , we are going to see print just after this , but we print a messageto the user , saying this is not a number , try again and this is now , the whole thing is enclosed inside awhile loop and this while loop has a condition true . in other words , the condition is never going tobecome false this while loop is going to keep on asking for a number . so , how do we get out of this ?well , if i come here and i get a value error , it will go back and the while will execute again . but ifthere is no error , remember , if there is no error here , then it will come to the else . this else isexecuted if there is no error and what the else does is , it gets us out of this vicious cycle . in otherwords , we are in an infinite loop , where we keep on trying to get one more piece of data from theuser , until we get something that we like and when we get that , we break out of the loop . this isanother kind of idiomatic way to use exceptions , in the context of input and output . as we said in thelast lecture , input and output is inherently error prone , because , you are dealing with an uncertain ,interacting environment , which can do things , which you can not anticipate or control . so , you musttake appropriate action to make sure that the interaction goes in the direction that you expect . theother part of interaction is displaying messages , which we call standard output or printing to thescreen . and , this is achieved using the print statement , which we have seen occasionally , informally ,without formally having defined it . the basic form of the print statement is to give a sequence ofvalues , separated by commas . so , print x , y will display the value of x , then , a space , then , the valueof y. print a , b , c will display values the values of a , b and c , separated by spaces . now , the otherthing that we can do is , directly print a string or a message . like we saw in the previous example , wecan say , print the string not a number . try again . this will display this string on the screen . now ,you can combine these two things in interesting ways . so , print takes , in general , a sequence ofthings of arbitrary links , separated by commas . these things could be either messages or names . so ,we can say things , supposing , we want to print the value of x and y , but we want to indicate to theoutput , which is x , which is y. instead of saying , just print x comma y , which produces values on thescreen , with no indication as to which is x and which is y , we could have this more elaborate printstatement , which prints things . the first thing it prints is a message saying , the values are x colon .this will print x colon it will leave a space then , it will print the value of , current value of x then , itwill print y colon after a space and then , it will print the current value of y. so , we can interspersemessages with values , with names , to produce meaningful output that is more readable . by default ,print appends a new line whenever it is executed . in other words , every print statement , we justprint the way we have done so far , appears on a new line because the previous print statementimplicitly moves the output to a new line . now , if we want to control this , we can use an optionalargument called end . so , we can provide a string saying , this is what should we put at the end of theprint statement by default , the value here is this new line character . so , we can replace this bysomething else . here is an example . supposing , we write these statements . the first statementsays , print continue on the this is just a string but set end to a space . the second line says , printsame line and then , it says , set end to a full stop and a new line . and then , the third statementsays , print next line . . so , what we are doing is , in the first statements , we are changing thedefault . the default would have been to print a new line , but the first statement is not printing a newline . if we print this , what we see is that , the first statements continue on the same line , come on asingle line , because , we have disabled the default print new line and we have explicitly put a new linehere and this has forced the next one to come on the next line . if we break this up and see whathappens here , we see that , in the first statement , we had this end , which says insert a space and thisis why we get a space between the word the on the first line and the word same coming in thesecond line . otherwise , the and same would have been fused together as a single word , right . so ,end equal to space is effectively separating this print from the next print by a space . the next printstatement inserts a full stop and a new line . implicitly , although the word same line ends without afull stop , we produce a full stop and after we produce a full stop , it produces a new line and finally ,after this new line , the next line comes in the new line and of course , because here we did not sayanything if we print after that , we implicitly would print on a new line . the other thing that wemight want to control is how the items are separated on a line . we said that , if we say print x commay , then x and y will be separated by a space by default , right . if we do this , print x , y , we set x equal to, y equal to and we say x is x and y is y and then , we want to end with a full stop . this is what youwant you want to write a string , x is , then the value of x and y is , then the value of y and then , afull stop . now , because everything is separated by a space , what we find is that , we find a space overhere do you see this ? this is fine . so , we get a space here , because , that is from this comma we geta space here , which is from this comma we get a space here , which is from this comma . and then ,we get an unwanted space between and the full stop . so , how do we get rid of this space , thesecond space , right ? we do not want a full stop to come after the space . so , just like we have theoptional argument end , we have an optional argument sep , which specifies what string should beused to separate . so , for example , if we take the earlier thing , we can say , do not separate it withanything . now , of course , do not separate it with anything , it changes , because , then , this x is willget fused and this and this will get fused . so , what we do instead is , we put the space explicitly here .earlier , we had no space here , at the end , just around the quotes . now , we put spaces where wewant them and we say do not put any other spaces . so , what this will say is that , x is space , i give thisspace do not put the space , put the value of x do not put a space , now , i give a space . so and y is ,give a space and then , now do not put a space here . these commas do not contribute any space ,because i have set separator should be empty and in particular , what this means is that , this lastcomma , the comma between the y and the full stop , will not generate a space . and in fact , if youexecute this , then , you will get the output , x is and y is and the way it works is that , this is thefirst block . this is everything up to here . then , this is the second block , this is this . then , this is thethird block , which is this whole thing , with the spaces given and then , this is the value of y and finally ,this is the full stop . this is one way to control the output of a print statement . so , with the optionalarguments end and sep , we can control when successive prints continue on the same line and wecan control to some limited extent , how these values are separated on a line . but we may actuallywant to do a lot more . we might want to put a sequence of things , so that , they all line up , right .supposing , we want to print out a table using a print statement , we want to make sure that thecolumns line up . so , we might want to say that , each item that we want to print , like we have printinga sequence of numbers , line by line , because , the numbers may have different widths some may bedigits , some may be digits we might say print them all to occupy characters width , right . this isa thing that we might want to do , align text . now , within this alignment , we might want to alignthings left or right . if we have a default with , say characters if they are numbers , we might wantthem right aligned , so that the units digit is aligned up if they are names , we might want them leftaligned , so that we can read them from left to right , without it looking ragged . and if we are doingthings like calculating averages or something , we may not want the entire thing to be displayed wemight want to truncate it to decimal points say , it is currency or something like that . these are allmore intricate ways of formatting the output and we will see in the next lecture how to do this . butright now , you can use end and sep to do minimal formatting . to summarize , you can use the inputstatement with an optional message , in order to read from the keyboard . you can print to the screenusing the print statement . now , we mentioned at the beginning that , there are some differencesbetween python and and here is one of the more obvious differences that you will see , if youlook at python code , which is available from various sources . in python , you can say print spaceand then , give the , what is given as the arguments to print in python . python insists on it beingcalled like a function , with brackets in python the brackets are optional . so , you will very often see ,in python code , something that looks like print x , y , given without any brackets . this is legal inpython this is not legal in python . just be careful about this . and what we saw is that , with thelimited amount of control , we can make print behave as we want . so , we can specify what to put atthe end . in particular , we can tell it not to put a new line . so , continue printing in the same line andwe can separate the values by something other than the default space character . let us see what todo when things go wrong with our programs . now there are many different kinds of things that cango wrong . for instance we might have an expression like x divided by z , and z has a value zero . so ,this expression value can not be computed , or we might be trying to convert something from a stringto an integer where the string s is not a valid representation of an integer . we could also be trying tocompute an expression , using a name whose value has not been defined , or we could try to index aposition in a list which does not exist . as we go forward we will be looking at how to read and writefrom files on the disc . so , we may be trying to read from a file , but perhaps there is no such file or wemay be trying to write to a file , but the disc is actually full . so , there are many situations in whichwhile our program is running we might encounter an error . some of these errors can be anticipatedwhereas , others are unexpected . if we can anticipate an error we would prefer to think of it not as anerror , but as an exception . so , think of the word exceptional . we encounter a normal situation , theway we would like our program to run and then occasionally we might encounter an exceptionalsituation , where something wrong happens and what we would like to do is provide a plan , on howto deal with this exceptional situation and this is called exception handling . so , exception handlingmay ask , when something goes wrong how do we provide corrective action . now the type ofcorrective action could depend on what type of error it is . if for instance we are trying to read a fileand the file does not exist perhaps we had asked the user to type a file name . so , you could display amessage and ask the user to retype the file name , saying the file asked for does not exist . on theother hand if a list is being indexed out of bounds there is probably an error in our program , and wemight want to print out this value the value of the index to try and diagnose what is going wrongwith our program . sometimes the error handling might just be debugging our error prone program .for all this what we require is a way of capturing these errors within the program as it is runningwithout killing the program . so , as we have seen when we have spotted errors while we have beenusing the interpreter if an error does happen and we do not trap it in this way then the program willactually abort and exit . so , we want a way to catch the error and deal with it without aborting theprogram . now , there are many different types of errors and some of these we have seen , but we maynot have noticed the subtelty of these for example , when we run python and we type somethingwhich is wrong , then we get something called a syntax error and the message that python gives us issyntax error invalid syntax . for example , supposing we try to create a list and by mistake we use asemicolon instead of a comma.then immediately python points to that semicolon and says this is asyntax error it is invalid python syntax . of course , if we have invalid syntax that means , the programis not going to run at all and there is not much we can do . so , what we are really interested in iserrors that happen in valid programs . the program is syntactically correct it is something that thepython interpreter can execute , but while the code is being executed some error happens . these arewhat are called run time errors these are errors that happen while the program is running and hereagain we have seen these errors and they come with some diagnostic information . for instance , if weuse a name whose value is undefined then we get a message from python that the name is notdefined and we also get a code at the beginning of the line saying this is a name error . this ispython 's way of telling us what type of error it is similarly , if we have an arithmetic expression wherewe end up dividing by a value then , we will get something called a zero division error and finally , ifyou try to index a list outside its range then we get something called an index error . let us look at allthis error . just be sure that we understand . supposing we say y is equal to times x and we have notdefine anything for x then , it gives us an index error a name error and it says clearly that , the name xis not defined . on the other hand , if we say is equal to divided by then we get a division errorand along with the message division by and finally , if we have a list say , and then we ask for theposition three then it will say that there is no position three in this list . so , this is an index error . so ,these are three examples of the types of error that the python interpreter tells us and notice thatthere is an error name at the beginning index error name error zero division error plus a diagnosticexplanation after that . let us first quickly settle on some terminology . so , usually the act of signallingan error is called raising an exception . so , when the python interpreter detects an error it gives usinformation about this error and as we saw it comes in two parts , there is the type of the error givewhat kind of error it is . so , it is name error or an index error or a zero division error and . secondly ,there is some diagnostic information telling us where this error occurs . so , it is not enough to just tellus oh some value was not defined it tells us specifically the name x is not defined . this gives us somehint as to where the error might be now when , such an error is signaled by python what we wouldlike to do is from within our program handle it right . so , we would like to anticipate and takecorrective action based on the error type . so , we may not want to take the same type of action forevery error type . that is why it is important to know whether it is a name error or an index error orsomething else . and depending on what the error is , we might take appropriate action for that typeof error and finally , if we do get an error or an exception which we have not explicitly handled thenthe python interpreter has no option , but to abort the program . so , if we do not handle an exceptionif an exception is unhandled then aborts the execution aborts . this is done using a new type of blockwhich we have not seen before called try . so , what we have is try block . so , when we have code , herein which we anticipate that there may be some error we put it inside a try . this is our usual block ofcode where we anticipate that something may go wrong and now we provide contingencies for allthe things that could go wrong depending on the type of error and this is provided using this exceptstatement . it says try this and if something goes wrong , then go to the appropriate except one afterthe other . the first one says what happens if an index error occurs . so , this is the code that happensif an index error occurs on the other hand maybe i could get a name error or a key error for both ofwhich i do the same thing , so this is the next except block . so , you could have as many except blocksas you have types of errors which you anticipate errors for it is not obligatory to handle every kind oferror , only those which you anticipate and of course , now you might want to do something in generalfor all errors that you do not anticipate . so , you can have a pure except block . so , kind of a nakedexcept block in which you do not specify the type of error and by default such an except statementwould catch all other exceptions . the important thing to remember is that this happens in sequence .if i have three errors for example , if i have an index error and a name error and a zero division errorthen , what will happen is that , it will first go here and find that there is an index error . this code willexecute . the name error code will not execute on the other hand , if i had only a name error and if ihad a zero division error for example , then because there is a name error first it will first it will comehere and will find that there is no index error then will come here and say there is a name error andwill execute this code . the zero division error will not be explicitly handled , the program will notabort , but there will be no code executed for the zero division error it is not that it tries each one ofthese in turn it will try whichever except matches the error and it will skip the rest . so , finally , if i hadonly a zero division error in this particular example then , since it is not an index error and it is not aname error , it would try to go through these in turns that would come here find this is not a type oferror . it is not a type of error and it will go to the default except statement and catch all otherexceptions . finally , python offers us a very useful alternative clause called else . so , this else is in thesame spirit as the else associated with a 'for ' or a 'while ' remember that a for or a while that doesnot break that terminates normally then executes the else if there is a break the else is skipped in thesame way , if the try executes normally that is there is no error which is found then the else willexecute otherwise the else is skipped right . so , we have an else block which will execute if the tryterminates normally with no errors . this is the overall structure of how we handle exceptions we putthe code that we want inside a try block then we have a sequence of except blocks which catchdifferent types of exceptions we can catch more than one type of exception by putting a sequence ina tuple of exceptions , we can have a default except with no name associated with it to catch all unother exceptions which are not handled and finally , we have an else which will execute if the tryterminates normally . now , while we normally use exception handling to deal with errors which we donot anticipate . we can actually use it to change our style of programming . so , let us look at a typicalexample . we saw recently that we can use dictionaries in python . so , dictionaries associate valueswith keys here we have two keys dhawan and kohli and with each key which is a name we have a listof scores . so , this score is a dictionary whose keys are strings and whose values are lists of numbers .now suppose we want to add a score to this . the score is associated with a particular batsman b. so ,we have a score s for a batsman b and we want to update this dictionary . now there are twosituations one is that we already have an entry for b in the dictionary in which case we want toappend s to the existing list scores of b the other situation is that this is a new batsman , there is nokey for b in which case we have to create a key by setting scores of b equal to the list containing sright.we have two alternative modes of operation it is an error to try an append to a non existentkey , but if there is an existing key we do not want to lose it by reassigning s. so , we want to appendit . so , we want to distinguish these two cases . a standard way to do this in using what we havealready seen , is to use the command the the statement in to check whether the value b alreadyoccurs as a key in scores . so , we say if b is in the scores , dot keys if we have b as an existing key thenwe append the score otherwise we create a new entry . so , this is fine , now we can actually do thisusing exception handling as follows we try to append it right we assume by default that the bbatsman b already exists as a key in this dictionary scores and we try scores b dot append s. whatwould happen if b is not there ? well python will signal an error saying that this is an invalid key andthat is called a key error . so , we can then revert to this except statement then say oh if there is keyerror when i try to append s to scores of b then create an entry scores of b is equal to s. so , this isjust a different style , it is not saying that one is better than the other , but it is just emphasizing thatonce we have exception handling under our control we may be able to do things differently fromwhat we are used to and sometimes these may be more clear it is a matter of style you might befurther left or the right , but both are valid pieces of python code . let us examine what actuallyhappens when we hit an error . so , suppose we start executing something and we have a function callto a function f , with parameters y and z this will go and look up a definition for the function andinside the definition perhaps . so , this call results in executing this code and this definition might haveyet another function called in it call g. this will in turn transfer us to a new definition sorry thisshould be on the same line g and this might in turn have another function h and finally , when we goto h perhaps this where the problem happens . somewhere inside h perhaps there is an index errorand where we used this list for example , in h we did not put it on a try block and so , the error is nothandled . so , what happens we said is when an error is not handled the program aborts , but theprogram does not directly abort this function will abort and it will transfer the error back towhatever called it . so , what will happen here is that this index error will go back to the point where ,h was invoked in g. now , it is as though g has generated an index error calling h has generated anindex error . so , an index error is actually now within g because h did not do anything with that errorwe just passed it back with the error . now , we have two options either g has a try block , but if g doesnot have a try block then this error will cause g to abort . so , what will happen next is that if g doesnot handle it then this will go back to where g was called in f and likewise if now f does not handle itthen it will go back to where f was called in the main program . so , we keep back going back acrossthe sequence of function calls passing back the error . if we do not handle it in the function where weare right now , the error goes back this function aborts it goes back and finally , when it reaches themain thread of control the first function of the first python code , that we are executing there if we donot handle it then definitely the overall python program aborts . so , it is not as though the very firsttime we find an error which is not handled it will abort it will merely pass control back to where itwas called from and across the sequence of calls hierarchically we can catch it at any point . so , we donot have to catch the error at the point where its handled we can catch it higher up from the pointthat is calling us . to summarize exception handling allows us to gracefully deal with run time errors .so , python when it flags an error tells us the type of error and some diagnostic information . using atry and except block , we can check the type of error and take appropriate action based on the type .we also saw with that inserting a value into a dictionary example that we can exploit exceptionhandling to develop new styles of programming and finally , what we will see is that , as we go aheadand we start dealing with input output and files exceptions will be rather more common as we sawearlier one of the examples we mentioned was a file is not found or a disk is full . input and outputinherently involves a lot of interaction with outside things outside the program and hence is muchmore prone to errors and therefore , is useful to be able have this mechanism within our bag of tricks .quite often , we want to do something to an entire list . for instance , we might want to replace everyitem in the list by some derived value f of x. so , we would write a loop as follows , for every x in it ,replace x by f of x. now , we could write a function to do this , which does this for different lists anddifferent values of l. we could say , define apply list , which takes the function f and the list l , and forevery x and l , you just replace this x by f of x and since l , list is a mutable item , this will update list inthe calling function as well . python has a built in function map , which does precisely this . so , map f lapplies f , in turn to each element of l. now , although you would think that , if you take a list , say , x , x, and you apply map , and you get f of x , f of x , that the output of map should be another list ,unfortunately , in python , and this is another difference between python and python , the outputof map is not a list . so , you need to use the list function like we did before . so , you need to say list ofmap f l to get a list , and you can however , use the output of map directly in a for loop , by saying , for iin list map f l or you can even say for i in map f l , this will work . so , you do not need to use the listnotation , if you just wanted to index menu , but if you want to use it as a list , you must use the listfunction to convert it . and , this is pretty much what happens , with functions like range and d dotkeys and so on . these are all things which give us sequences of values . these sequences are notabsolutely lists they can be used in for functions but if you want to use them as lists , and manipulatethem as lists , you must use list to convert them from their sequence to the list form . another thingthat we typically want to do is to take a list and extract values that satisfy a certain property . so , wemight have a list of integers called number list , and from this , we might want to extract the list ofprimes . we start off by saying that , the list of primes we want is empty , and we run through thenumber list , and for each number in that list , we apply the test , is it a prime if it is a prime , then weappend the list to our output list . so , we start with a list x , x and so on . and then , we apply thetest and some of them will pass , and some of them will succeed , some of them will fail , and at theend , wherever the things pass , those items will emerge in the output . so , in general , we could write aselect function which takes the property and a list , and it creates a sub list by going through everyelement in the list , checking if the property holds , and for those elements which the property holds ,appending it to the sub list . the difference between select and our earlier map function is that ,property is not an arbitrary function it does not manipulate l at all , all it does is , it checks whetherthe property is true or not . the property will be a function which takes an element in the list , andtells us true or false if it is true , it gets copied to the output if it is false , it gets discarded . there is abuilt in function for this as well . it is called filter . so , filter takes a function p , which returns true orfalse for every element , and it pulls out precisely that sublist of l , for which every item in l , which fallsinto the sublist satisfies p. let us look at a concrete example . supposing , we have the list of numbersfrom to . we want to first pull out only the even numbers in the list . that is a filter operationand then , for each of these even numbers , we want to square them . so , here , we take the evennumbers , right , by using the filter , and then , we map square . then , we get a list . and then , of course ,having got this list , then we can add it up . the sum is not the part of this function . if we want to firstextract the squares of the even numbers , and that can be done using a combination of filter , andthen , map . filter , first gives us the even numbers and then map gives us the squares and the squareis defined here and this even is defined here . there is a very neat way of combining map and filter ,without using that notation . let us get to it , through a simpler mathematical example . so , you mighthave studied in school , from right hand , right angled triangles that , by pythagoras theorem , youknow that , if x , y and z are the lengths of the two sides and the hypotenuse respectively , then , xsquare plus y square will be z square . so , pythagorean triple is a set of integers , say , and , forexample , such that , x square plus y square is z square square is square is square is . letus say , we want to know all the integer values of x , y and z , whose values are below n , such that , x , yand z form a pythagorean triple instance . in conventional mathematical notation , you might see thiskind of expression . it says , give me all triples x , y and z , such that this bar stands for such that suchthat , x , y and z , all lie between and n. and , in addition , x square plus y square is equal to z square .this is , in some sense , where we get the values from this is an existing set . we have x ranging fromto n , y ranging from to n , z ranging from to n , and we put together all possible combinations , thenwe take out those combinations to satisfy a given property , x square plus y square is equal to zsquare , and those are the ones that we extract out . in set theory , this is called set comprehension .this is the way of building a new set by applying some conditional things to an old set . this is alsoimplicitly applying a kind of a tripling operator it takes separate sets , x from to n , y from to n , zfrom to n , combines them into triples . there is a filtering process by which you only pull out thosetriples , where x square plus y square is z square and then , there is a manipulating step , where youcombine them into a single triple , x comma y comma z. but , in general , the main point is that you arebuilding a new set from existing sets . so , what python does and many other languages also , fromwhich python is inspired to , is allow us to extend this notation to lists . this actually comes from astyle of programming called functional programming , which , from where this kind of a notation isthere , and python has borrowed it and it works quite well . here is how you will write our earlierthing , which we had said , the squares of the even numbers below . earlier , we had given a mapfilter thing . so , we had said , we will take a range , and we will filter it progressively , and then , wewould do a map of square . in python , there is an implicit perpendicular line below , before the 'for 'from the set notation . it just takes a square of x , for i in range , such that , iseven of x we havehere parts . so , we have a generator , which tells us where to get the values from . remember that ,list comprehension or set comprehension , pulls out values from an existing set of lists , so we firstgenerate a list . in this case , the list range , but we could use our other lists we could use for i inany one , just like a 'for ' . then , we will apply a filter to it , which are the values in this list , which youare going to retain . and then , for each of those values we can do something to it . in this case , wesquared and that will be our output . this is how we generate a list using map and filter without usingthe words map and filter in between , you just use the 'for ' for the generator , 'if ' for the filter , and themap is implicit by just applying a function to the output of the generator in the filter . let us go backto the pythagorean triple example . we want all pythagorean triples with x , y , z below . this , aswe said , requires us to cycle through all values of x , y , and z in that range . it is a little bit morecomplicated than the one we did before , where we only had a single generator , all the values inrange to . it is simple enough to write it with multiple forms . so , we say , i want x comma ycomma z , for x in range , for y in range , for z in range , provided , x squared plus y squaredis equal to z squared . that is written with the 'if ' . now , just to fit on the slide , i have split it up intomultiple lines , but actually , this will be a single line of python code . in what order will these begenerated ? well , it will behave exactly like a nested loop . imagine , we had written a loop in which wehad said , for x in range , for y in range , for z in range , and so on . so , what happens here isthat , first a value of will be fixed for x , and then a value of will be fixed for y , then for z. in thefirst pair , triple that comes out is , , . then , the value of z will change , the innermost loop changesnext . the next one will be , , . this is x , this is y , this is z. so , in this way , we will keep going until itwill be , , . so , when this hits , then this for loop will exit and we go to . so , i will get , , ,and to , , , , , , and so on . the innermost for , so z will cycle first , then y , and then x will cycleslowest . so , just remember that . let us see how this works in python . let us first begin by definingsquare a square of x return x times x then , we can define iseven x , to check that the remainder of xdivided by is . so , we have square , iseven should be false iseven should be true and soon . now , we have list comprehension . let us look at the set of square x , for x in range , such thatx is even . so , we see now that , is there . so square , square , square , square , and so on . this isour list comprehension . now , let us do the pythagorean triple one . we said , we want x , y , z , for x inrange , y in range , for z in range . this is our generators , with the condition that x timesx , plus y times y , is equal to z times z. now , you see a lot of things which have come . in particular , youshould see in the early stages somewhere , things which we are familiar with , like , , , and so on .but , you also see some nonsensical figure , that , , . so , we should probably have done this better ,but you will not worry about that but , what i want to emphasize is that , you see things like , say , yousee , , , which is a stupid one but , let us see , for instance , you say , you see , , . so , we saw, , , somewhere so , , . but , you will also see , later on , , . now , one might argue that , , ,, and , , , are the same triplets . so , how do we eliminate this duplicate ? so , we can have asituation , just like we have in a 'for loop ' , where the later loop can depend on an earlier loop if theouter loop says , i to some , i goes from something to something , the later loop can say that , j startsfrom i , and goes forward . for instance , we can now rewrite our pythagorean triples to say that , x is inrange , but y does not start at it starts from x onwards . so , y is never smaller than x , and z isnever smaller than y. so , z is also never smaller than x , because y itself is never smaller than x , andthis version will actually eliminate duplicates . here is our earlier definition of pythagoras , where wehad x , y , and z unconstrained . so , what i do is , i go back , and i say that , y is not in range , but y isin range x to , and z is in range y to . and now , you will see a much smaller list and inparticular you will see that , in every sequence that is generated , x is less than or equal to y is lessthan equal to z you only get one copy of things like , , . so , you see , , , but you do not see ,, , , is here . next one is , , , , is eliminated . the key thing is that , generators can bedependent on outer generators inner generators can be dependent on outer generators . this listcomprehension notation is particularly useful for initializing lists , for example , for initializingmatrices , when we are doing matrix like computations . supposing , i want to initialize a by matrixto all zeros . so , by matrix has rows and columns , and i am using the convention that , i store itrow wise . so , i have to store the first row . so , it will be entries for the first row then , entries forthe second row , and so on . here is an initialization , which says , l consists of something for the outerthings says for , this is for each row . it is something for each row . for rows , , , , i do somethingand what is that something ? i create a list of zeros of that size . each row j , from to , consists ofcolumns , , , which are zeros . this will actually generate the correct sequence that we saw at , thatwould we need to initialize the generators . here is that list comprehension notation for initializingthe matrix . so , it says , for every j in range , right , we create a list , and that list itself has zero for i inrange , and if you do this , and look at it , then , correctly it has zeros , and zeros , and zeros ,times . these are the four rows . suppose , instead , we split this initialization into steps we firstcreate a list of zeroes called zerolist , which says zero for i in range . this creates a list of zerosand then , we copy this list times , in the four rows . we say that the actual matrix l has copies ofzerolist . now , we go and change one entry say , we change entry in row . from the top , it isactually second row . it is the second row , second column , if you want to think in normal terms . so ,we take up list , which is the second list . now , what you expect is the output of this . there we havethe zero lists , and then , we say , l is copies of zerolists , for j in range . so , superficially , l looksexactly the same . now , we say l is equal to , and if you look at l now , we will find that we havenot one , but copies of . this is apparently something that we did not expect . the output after lis equal to is , , , , , , , , , , , and why is this happening well , that is becauseby making a single zerolist , and then making copies of it , we have effectively created names withthe same list . so , whether we access it through l or l or l or l , all of them are pointing to thesame zerolist . so , any one of those updates would actually update all lists . if you want to create adimensional matrix and initialize it , make sure you initialize it in one shot using a nested range , andnot in copies like this , because these copies will unintentionally combine rows into copies of thesame thing , and updates to one row will also update another row . to summarize , map and filter arevery useful functions to manipulating lists , and python provides , like many other programminglanguages , based on the function programming , the notation called list comprehension , to combinemap and filter . and , one of the uses that we saw for list comprehension is to correctly initializedimensional or multi dimensional lists to some default values . we have seen that we pass values tofunctions by substituting values for the argument set when defining the function . and , this iseffectively the same as having an implicit assignment . so , when we say power x n , and we call itvalues with and , then we have this assignment x equal to and n equal to . it is not really there ,but it is as though , this code is executed by preceding this assignment there and of course , theadvantage of calling it as the function is that , we do not have to specify x and n in the functiondefinition it comes with the call . so , for different values of x and n , we will execute the same code .the first thing that python allows us to do flexibly , is to not go by the order it is not that , the first is x ,and the second is n we can , if you do not remember the order , but we do know the values , thenames assigned to them , we can actually call them by using the name of the argument . so , we caneven reverse the thing , and say , call power . and i know that , x is the bottom value i know it is x to thepower n , but i do not remember whether x comes first , or n comes first . i can say , let us just play safeand say power of n equal to , x equal to and this will correctly associate the value according to thename of the argument and not according to the position . another nice feature of python is that , itallows some arguments to be left out and implicitly have default values . recall that , we had definedthis type conversion function int of s , which will take a string and try to represent it as an integer , if sis a valid representation of an integer . so , we said that , if we give it the string , then , int wouldconvert it to the number . if on the other hand , we gave it a string like a , since a is not a validnumber , a would actually generate an error . now , it turns out that , int is actually not a function ofone argument , but two arguments and the second argument is the base . so , we give it a string andconvert it to a number in base b , and if we do not provide b , then , by default b has value . so , whatis happening in the earlier int conversions is that , it is as though we are saying , int with base ,but since , we do not provide the , python has a mechanism to take the value that is not provided ,and substitute to the default value . now , if we do provide it a value , then , for instance , we caneven make sense of a . if you have base , if you have studied base ever in school , you wouldknow that , you have the digit zero to , but base has numbers up to . so , the numbers beyondare usually written using a , b , c , d , e , f. so , a corresponds to , what we would think of is the numberin base . so , if you write a in base , then , this is the sixteenth position and this is the onesposition . so , we have times , because the a is , plus . in numeric terms , this will returncorrectly . how does this work in python . this would be how internally , if you were to write a similarfunction , you would write it . so , you provide the arguments , and for the argument for which youwant an optional default argument , you provide the value in the function definition . so , what thisdefinition says is that , int takes arguments s and b and b is assumed to be , and is hence ,optional if the person omits the second argument , then it will automatically take the value .otherwise , it will take the value provided by the function call . the default value is provided in thefunction definition and if that parameter is omitted , then , the default value is used instead . but , onething to remember is that , this default value is something that is supposed to be available when thefunction is defined . it can not be something which is calculated , when the function is called . so , wesaw various functions like quick sort and merge sort and binary search , where we were forced topass along with the array the starting position and the ending position . now , this is fine for theintermediate calls , but , when we want to actually sort a list , the first time we have to alwaysremember to call it with zero , and the length of the list . so , it would be tempting to say that , wedefine the function as something which takes an initial array a as the first argument , and then , bydefault takes the left boundary to be zero , which is fine , and the right boundary to be the length of a .but , the problem is that , this quantity , the length of a , depends on a itself . so , when the function isdefined , there will be , or may not be a value for a and whatever value you have chosen for a , if thereis one , that length will be taken as a default . it will not be dynamically computed each time we callquicksort . so , this does not work , right . so , when you have default values , the default value has to bea static value , which can be determined when the definition is read for the first time , not when it isexecuted . here is a simple prototype . suppose we have a function with arguments a , b , c , d and wehave , c has the default value , and d has a default value . then , if you have a call with justarguments , then , this will be associated with a and b , and so , this will be interpreted as f , , andfor the missing argument c and d , you get the defaults and . on the other hand , you mightprovide arguments , in which case , a becomes , b becomes as before , and c becomes , but dis left unspecified so , it pick up the default value . this is interpreted as f of , , and the defaultvalue . so , the thing to keep in mind is that , the default values are given by position . there is noway in this function to say that , should be given for d , and i want the default value for c you canonly drop values by position from the end . so , if i have default values , and if i want to only specifythe second of them , it is not possible i will have to redefine the function to reorder it . therefore , youmust make sure that , when you use these default values , they come at the end , and they areidentified by position . and do not mix it up , and do not confuse yourself by combining these thingsrandomly . so , the order of the arguments is important . a function definition associates a functionbody with a name . it says , the name f will be interpreted as a function which takes some argumentsand does something . in many ways , python interprets this like any other assignment of a value to aname . for instance , this value could be defined in different ways , multiple ways , in conditional ways .so , as you go along , a function can be redefined , or it can be defined in different ways depending onhow the computation proceeds . here is an example of a conditional definition . you have a conditionif it is true , you define f one way otherwise , you define f another way . so , depending on which ofthese conditions held when this definition was executed , later on the value of f will be different .now , this is not to say that , this is a desirable thing to do , because you might be confused as to whatf is doing . but , there are situations where you might want to write f in one way , or another way ,depending on how the computation is proceeding and python does allow you to do this . probably , atan introductory take to python , this is not very useful but , this is useful to know that such apossibility exists and in particular , you can go on and redefine f as you go ahead . another thing youcan do in python , which may seem a bit strange to you , is you can take an existing function , and mapit to a new name . so , we can define a function f , which as we said , associates with the name f , thebody of this function at a later stage , we can say g equal to f. and what this means is now that , wecan also use g of a , b , c and it will mean the same as f of a , b , c. so , if you use g in the function , it willuse exactly the same function as a , its exactly like assigning one list to another , or one dictionary toanother and so on . now , why would you want to do this ? so , one useful way in which you can dothis , use this facility is to pass a function to another function . suppose , we want to apply a givenfunction f to its argument n times , then we can write a generic function like this called apply , whichtakes arguments . the first is the function , the second is the argument , and the third is the numberof times , the repetitions . so , we start with the value that you are provided , and as many times as youare asked to , you keep iterating function f. so , let us look at a concrete example . supposing , we havedefined a function square of x , which just returns x times x and now we can say , apply square to thevalue twice . so , what this means is , apply square of , and then , square of that so , do squaretwice . therefore , you get squared squared . so , what is happening here is that , square isbeing assigned to f , is being assigned to x , and is being assigned to n. this is exactly as we saidlike , before , like , saying f is equal to square . so , in this sense , being able to take a function name andassign it to another name is very useful , because , it allows us to pass functions from one place toanother place , and execute that function inside the another function , without knowing in advancewhat that function is . one practical use of this is to customize functions such as sort . sometimes , weneed to sort values based on different criteria . so , we might have an abstract compare function ,which returns minus if the first argument is smaller , zero if the arguments are equal , and plus ifthe first argument is bigger than the second . so , when comparing strings , we may have differentways of comparing strings in mind , and we might want to check the difference , when we sort bythese different ways . we might have one sort in which we compare strings in dictionary order . so ,string like aab will come before ab , because , the second position a is smaller than b. so , this willresult in minus , because , the first argument is smaller than the second argument . if , on the otherhand , we want to compare the strings by length , then , the same argument would give us plus ,because , aab has length and is longer than ab . so , we could write a sort function , which takes a list ,and takes a second argument , which is , how to compare the entries in the list . the sort function itselfdoes not need to know what the elements in a list are whenever it is given a list of arbitrary values ,it is also told how to compare them . so , all it needs to do is , apply this function to values , andcheck if their answer is minus , zero , or plus and interpret it as less than , equal to or greater than .then , if you want , you can combine it with the earlier feature , which is , you can give it a defaultfunction . if you do not specify a sort function , there might be an implicit function that the sortfunction uses otherwise it will use the comparison function that you provide . to summarize ,function definitions behave just like other assignments of values to names . you can reassign a newdefinition to a function . you can define it conditionally and so on . crucially , you can use one functionand make it point , name point to another function , and this is implicitly used when we pass functionsto other functions and in situations like sorting , you can make your sorting more flexible by passingyour comparison function which is appropriate to the values we will sort . we have seen this kind ofsimultaneous assignment , where we take three names on the left and assign them to three values inthe right , and we enclose these in these round brackets . so , this kind of a sequence of values withthe round bracket is called a tuple . normally we talk about pairs , triples , quadruples , but in generalwhen it goes to values of k we call them k tuples . on python , tuples are also valid values . you cantake a single name and assign it a tuple of values . for instance , we can take a two dimensional pointwith x coordinates . and . and say that point has the value . comma . , and this is not a list ,but a tuple . and we will see in a minute what a tuple is . similarly , we can say that a date is made upof three parts a day , a month , and a year and we can encloses into a three value or triple . so , tuplebehaves like a list , so it is a kind of sequence . so , like strings and list , in a tuple you can extract oneelement of a sequence . so , we can say that the th value in point is the x coordinate . this wouldassign the value . to the value x to the name x coordinate , or we can take a slice we can say that ifwe want only and , we take date and take the slice from one to the end then we will getcomma . so , this behaves very much like a different type of sequence exactly like strings andlists we have seen so far , but the difference between a tuple and a list is that a tuple is immutable .so , tuple behaves more like a string in this case , we can not change for instance this date to bysaying date at position one should be replaced by the value . this is possible in a list , but not in atuple . so , tuples are immutable sequences , and you will see in a minute why this matters . let us goback to lists . a list is a sequence of values , and implicitly there are positions associated to thissequence starting at and going up to the length of the list minus . so , an alternative way ofviewing a list is to say that it maps every position to the value in this case , the values are integers .we can say that this list l is a map or function in a mathematical sense from the domain , , , ,to the range of integers and in particular , it assigns l to be , l to be and so on where we arelooking at this as a function value . so , the program language way of thinking about this is that , , ,, are what are called keys . so , these are the values with which we have some items associated . so ,we will search for the item associated with and we get back . we have keys and thecorresponding entries in the list are called values . so , a list is one way of associating keys to values .we can generalize this concept by allowing keys from a different set of things other than just a rangeof values from to n minus . so , a key for instance could be a string . so , we might want a list inwhich we index the values by the name of a player . so , for instance , you might keep track of the scorein a test match by saying that for each player s name what is the value associated . so , dhawan sscore is , pujara s score is , kohli s score is , we store these all in a more generic list wherethe list values are not indexed by position , but by some more abstract key in this case the name ofthe player . this is what python calls a dictionary , in some other programming languages this is alsocalled an associative array . so , you might see this in the literature . so , here is a store of values whichare accessed through a key which is not just a position , but some arbitrary index and python 's rule isthat any immutable value can be a key . this means that you can use strings which are immutable .and here for instance you can use tuples , but you can not use lists as we will see . and the otherfeature of a dictionary is that like a list , it is mutable we can take a value with a key and replace it .so , we can change pujara s score , if you want by an assignment to , and this will just take thecurrent dictionary and replace the value associated to pujara from to . so , dictionaries can beupdated in place and hence are mutable exactly like lists . we have to tell python that some name is adictionary and it is not a list . so , we signify an empty dictionary by curly braces . so , remember weuse square brackets for list . so , if you want to initialize that dictionary that we saw earlier then wewould first say test is the empty dictionary by giving it the braces here and then we can startassigning values to all the players that we had before like dhawan and pujara and so on . so , noticethat all these three sequences and types of things that we have are different , so for strings of course ,we use double codes or single codes for list we use square brackets for tuples , we use roundbrackets and for dictionary , we use braces . so , there is an unambiguous way of signaling to pythonwhat type of a collection we are associating with the name , so that we can operate on it with theappropriate operations that are defined for that type of collection . so , once again for a dictionary ,the key can be any immutable value that means , your key could be an integer , it could be a float , itcould be a bool , it could be a string , it could be a tuple , what it can not be is a list or a dictionary . so ,we can not have a value indexed by a list itself or by a dictionary . so , we can have multiple just like wehave nested list where we can have a list containing list and then we have two indices take the thlist and then their first position in the list , we can have two levels of keys . if you want to keep trackof scores across multiple test matches , instead of having two dictionaries is we can have onedictionary where the first key is the test match test or test , and the second key is a player . withthe same first key for example , with the same different first key for example , test and test youcould keep track of two different scores for dhawan . so , the score in test and the score in test .and we can have more than one player in test like we have here we have both kohli and dhawanthis one . if you try to display a dictionary in python , it will show it to you in this bracket in this kind ofcurly bracket notation , where each entry will be the key followed by the values separated by thecolon and then this will be like a list separated by commas . and if we have multiple keys thenessentially this is one whole entry in this dictionary , and for the key test , i have these values forthe key test , i have these values . and internally they are again dictionaries , so they have their ownkey value . let us see how it works we start with an empty dictionary say score . and now we want tocreate keys , so suppose we will say score test , dhawan equal to . now this is going to give us anerror , because we have not told it that score test is suppose to be a dictionary . so , it does not knowthat we can further index with the word dhawan . so , we have to first tell it that not only score is adictionary , so is score test and presumably since we will use it , so is score test . now we can goback and set dhawan 's score in the first test to and may be you can set the second test to andmaybe we can set kohli s score in the first test to . now , if you ask me to show what scores lookslike , we see that it has an outer dictionary with two keys test , test each of which is a nesteddictionary . in a nested dictionaries , we have two keys dhawan and kohli with scores and asthe values . in test , has one dictionary entry with dhawan as a key and is the score . if you wantto process a dictionary then we would need to run through all the values and one way to runthrough value all the values is to extract the keys and extract each value by turn . so , there is afunction d dot keys which returns a sequence of keys of a dictionary d. and the typical thing wewould do is for every key in d dot keys do something with d square bracket k. so , pick up all the keys .this is like saying for every position in a list do something the value at that position . this is somethingfor every key in a list do something with a value associated to that . now one thing we have to keep inmind which i will show in a minute is that d dot keys not in any predictable order . so , dictionaries areoptimized internally to return the value with a key quickly . it may not preserve the keys in the orderin which they are inserted . so , you can not predict anything about how d dot keys will be presentedto us . one way to do this is to use the sorted function . we can say for k in sorted d dot keys , processd k , and this will give us the keys in sorted order according to the sort function . so , sorted l is afunction we have not seen so far sorted l returns a sorted copy of l , it does not modify . what wehave seen so far is l dot sort , which is the function which takes a list and updates it in place . so ,sorted l takes an input list , leaves it unchanged , but it returns a sorted version . the other thing tokeep in mind is that though it is tempting to believe that d dot keys is a list , it is not a list it is likerange and other things . it is just a sequence of values that you can use inside of for , so we must usethe list property to actually create a list out of d dot keys . so , let us validate the claim that keys arenot kept in any particular order . so , let us start with an empty dictionary . and now let us create foreach letter and entry which is the same as that letter . so , we can say for l in a , b , c , d , e , f , g , h , i , d i , dl is equal to l. so , what it is this saying , so when you say for l in a string it goes to each letter in thatstring , so want to say d with key a is the value a , d with the key b is the value b and so on right . so ,now , if i ask you what is d a , you can a , what is d i , it is i. now notice that the keys are inserted in theorder a , b , c , d , e , f , g , h , i but if i ask for d dot keys it produces it in some very random order . so , e isfirst and a is way down and so on . there is no specific order that you can get from this . so , this is justto emphasize that the order in which keys are inserted into the dictionary is not going to be the orderin which they are presented to through the keys function . so , you should always ensure that if youwant to process the keys in a particular order make sure that you preserve that order when youextract the keys you can not assume that the keys will come out in any given order . in other way torun through the values in a dictionary is to use d dot values . so , d dot keys returns the key is in someorder , d dot values gives you the values in some order . so , this is for example like say for x in l. so , youjust get the values you do not get that positions . here you just get the values you do not get the keys .so , if you want to add up all the values for instance from a dictionary , you can start off by initializingtotal to , and for each value , you can just add it up yes right . so , you can pick up each s in test dotvalues and add it to the total . so , you can test for a key being in a dictionary by using the in operator ,just like list when you say x in l for a list it tells you true if x belongs to l the value x belongs to l , it tellsyou false otherwise . the same is true of keys . so , if i want to add up the score for individual batsmen ,but i do not know , if they have batted in each test match . so , i will say for each of the keys , in thiscase , dhawan and kohli , initialize the dictionary which i have already set up not here i would have setthat total is a dictionary . so , total with key dhawan is , total with key kohli is . now for each matchin our nested dictionary , if dhawan is entered as a batsman in that match , so if a name dhawanappears as the key in score for that match then and only then you add a score , because if it does notappear it is illegal to access that match . so , this is one way to make sure that when you access a valuefrom a dictionary , the key actually exists , you can use the in function . here is a way of rememberingthat a dictionary is different from the list . if i start with an empty dictionary then i assign a key , whichhas not been seen so far , in a dictionary there is no problem it is just equivalent to inserting this keyin the dictionary with that value , if d already exists it will be updated . so , either you update or youinsert . this is in contrast with the list , where if you have an empty list and then try to insert at aposition which does not exist , you get an index error . in a dictionary , it flexibly expands toaccommodate new keys or updates a key depending on whether the key already exists or not . tosummarize , a dictionary is a more flexible association of values to keys than you have in a list theonly constraint that python imposes is that all keys must be immutable values . you can not have keys ,which are mutable values . so , we can not use dictionaries or list themselves as keys , but you can havenested dictionaries with multiple levels of these . the other thing is that we can use d dot keys tocycle through all the keys in the dictionary , and similarly d dot values , but the order in which thesekeys emerge from d dot keys is not predictable . so , we need to sort it to do something else if wewant to make sure to process them in a predictable order . so , it turns out that you will see thatdictionaries are actually something that make python a really useful language for manipulatinginformation from text files or tables , if you have what are called comma separated value tables , it istaken out of spreadsheet because then we can use column headings and accumulate values and soon . so , you should understand and assimilate dictionary in to your programming skills , because this iswhat makes python really a very powerful language for writing scripts to manipulate it . in theprevious lecture , we saw quicksort which works as follows . you first rearrange the elements withrespect to a pivot element which could be , well , say the first value in the array . you partition a , intothe lower and upper parts , those which are smaller than the pivot , and those which are bigger thanthe pivot . you rearrange the array so that pivot lies between the smaller and the bigger parts andthen you recursively sort the two partitions . and this was the actual python code which we ran andwe saw that it actually behaved not as well as merge sort even for the list of size , we saw ittook an appreciatively long time . what is the worst case behavior of quicksort ? the worst casebehavior of quicksort comes when the pivot is very far from the ideal value we want . the ideal valuewe want is median , the median would split the list into two equal parts and there by divide the workinto two equal parts , but if the pivot happens to be either the minimum or the maximum value in theoverall array , then supposing it is the maximum then every other value will go into the lower partand nothing will go into higher part . so , the recursive call it consists of sorting of n minus elements .if one partition is empty , the other one has size n minus , this would happen if that the pivot is oneof the extreme elements and if this happens and this is the worst case then in order to sort nelements , we have to recursively sort n minus elements and we are still doing this order n work inorder to rearrange the array because we do not find this until we have sorted out , gone through thewhole array and done the partition . this says t n is t n minus plus n and if we expand this thiscomes out to be exactly the same recurrence that we saw for insertion sort and selection sort . so , t nwould be plus up to n and this summation is just n into n plus by which would be order nsquare . the even more paradoxical thing about quicksort is that this would happen , if the array issorted either in the correct order or in the wrong order . supposing you are trying to sort in ascendingorder and we already have an array in ascending order then the first element will be the smallestelement . the split will give us an array of n minus on one side and put on the other side and thiskeep happening . the worst case of quicksort is actually an already sorted array . remember , we sawthat for insertion sort and already sorted array works well because the insert steps stops very fast .so , quicksort is actually in the worst case doing even worse than insertion sort and specifically onalready sorted arrays . however , it turns out that this is a very limited kind of worst case and one canactually try and quantify the behavior of quicksort over every possible permutation . so , if we take aninput array with end distinct values , we can assume that any permutation of these n values is equallylikely and we can compute how much time quicksort takes in each of these different n permutationsand assuming all are equally likely , if we average out over n permutations we can compute anaverage value . now , this sound simple but mathematically it is sophisticated and sorting is one of therare examples where you can meaningfully enumerate all the possible inputs and probabilities ofthose inputs , but if you do this calculation it turns out that in a precise mathematical sense quicksortactually works in order n log n in the average . so , the worst case though it is order n square actuallyhappens very rare the worst case actually arises because of a fixed choice of the pivot element . so ,we choose the first element as the pivot in our algorithm and so in order to construct the worst caseinput , if we always put the smallest or the largest element at the first position we get a worst caseinput . this tells us that a sorted input either ascending or descending is worst case for our choiceobject . supposing , instead we wanted to choose the midpoint we take the middle element in thearray as a random then again we can construct a worst case input by always putting the smallestvalue and working backward so that at every stage , the middle value is the smallest or largest value .so , for any fixed choice of pivot , if we have a pivot , which is picked in a fixed way in every iteration ,we can always reconstruct the worst case . however , if we change our strategy and say that each timewe call quicksort we randomly choose a value within the range of elements and pick that as thepivot , then it turns out that we can beat this order n squared worst case and get an expected runningtime , again an average running time probabilistically of order n log n. as a result of this becausethough it is worst case order n squared , but an average order n log n , quicksort is actually very fast .what we saw is it addresses one of the issues with merge sort because by sorting the rearranging inplace we do not create extra space . what we have not seen in which you can see if you read upanother book somewhere is that we can even eliminate the recursive part we can actually makequicksort operate iteratively over the intervals on which we want to solve . so , quicksort as a result ofthis has turned out to be in practice one of the most efficient sorting algorithms and when we have autility like a spread sheet where we have a button , which says sort this column then more often theyare not the internal algorithm that is implemented is actually quicksort we saw that python has afunction l dot sort which allows us to sort a list built in . you might ask , for example , what sort issorting algorithm is python using very often it will be quicksort . although , in some cases somealgorithm will decide on the values in the list and apply different sorting algorithm according to thetype of values , but default usually is quciksort . so , before we precede let us try and validate our claimthat quicksort s worst case behavior is actually tied to the description of the worst case input as inalready sorted list . here , we have as before our python implementation of quick sort in which wehave just repeated the code we wrote before . now , we are going to write another function which willdo the following . it will shuffle the elements of a list by a repeatedly picking two indexes and justswapping them . this will allow us to take care of range output just sorted and create a suitablyrandom shuffle of it here is the code for it . it is very simple , you use a python library called randomwhich allows you some functions to generate random numbers and one of the things that this libraryhas is this function randrange . a randrange generates an integer in the range to length of l minus .so , we pass it a list and we repeatedly pick two indexes j and k in the range to length of l minusand we exchange lj and lk and how many times we do this ? well we just do it a large number oftimes in this case say we have elements in a list , we will do this times we do it length of lby times . let us see how this works , we load as usual the python interpreter and then we importquicksort and then we import randomize . so , you can do this , you can write python functions inmultiple files and import them one after the other and they will all get loaded . now as before we willsay l for instance could be the list . so , let us also include sys and finish off that recursion limit processbecause we know this is gon na kill us . so , set a large recursion limit and now we set up a fairly largelist we had done last for an instance down to right . and what we saw was that , if we try toquick sort this list it takes a long time because it is and it is a worst case in . what we are goingto try and do now is and the same thing will happen even after it is sorted because even after it issorted is still a worst case input expect now it is an ascending order . so , both descending order andascending order take a long time . now , supposing we randomize l. so , if you look at l now you cansee that the numbers are no longer in order . so , you see some between the and andso on . our claim is that this will go faster and indeed you can see that if you run quicksort on this itreturns almost immediately and it is not because quicksort has become any faster , it is because oforder of input , because again if we have quicksort on sorted list again it is going to be slow . this justdemonstrates in a very effective way that if we randomize the list and we run quicksort it comes outimmediately , but if we do not randomize it and if we actually ask to sort the sorted list then it takes along time . so , we could actually check that , for instance , if we go back to this list and we make it sayeven something bigger like maybe and then we randomize it and then we sort it right itcomes little fast . so , this validates our claim that quicksort on an average is fast , it is only when yougive it these very bad inputs which are the already sorted once that it behaves in a poor manner .now , there is one more criterion that one has to be aware of when one is sorting data . so , very oftenthis sorting happens in stages on multiple attributes , for example , you might have a list of studentswho are listed in alphabetical order in the roll list after a quiz or a test , they all get marks . now , youwant to list them in order of marks , but where there are ties where two or more students have thesame marks you want to continue to have them listed in alphabetical order . so , in another words youhave an original order in alphabetic order and then you take another attribute namely marks andsorting by a marks should not disturb the sorting that already exists in alphabetical order . what itamounts to saying is that if we have two list two items in the original list which are equal then theymust retain the same order as they had after the sorting . so , i should not take two elements that areequal and , sort , swap them while sorting and this would be crucial when you are using somethinglike a spreadsheet because if you sort by one column you do not want to disturb the sorting that youdid by another column . unfortunately , quicksort the way we have described it is not stable becausewhenever we extend a partition in this partition stage or move the pivot to the center what we endup doing is disturbing the order of elements which were already there in the unsorted list . so , weargued earlier that disturbing this order does not matter because any way we are going to sort it , butit does matter if the sorting has to be stable . if there was a reason why these elements were inparticular order not for the current attribute , but for the different attribute and we move themaround then we are destroying the original sorted order . on the other hand , merge sort we can see isactually stable if you are careful to make sure that we always pick from one side consistently if thevalues are equal . so , when we are merging left and right when we have the equal to case we have toeither put the element from left into the final list or right . if we consistently choose the left then itwill always keep elements on to the left to the left of the ones in the right and therefore , it willremain a stable sort . similarly , insertion sort will also be stable if you make sure that we move thingsbackwards only if they are strictly smaller when we go backwards and we find something which isequal to the current value we stop the insertion . so , insertion sort merge sort as stable sort quicksortas we have described it is not stable though it is possible to do a more careful implementation andmake it stable . we saw that merge sort is an order n log n sorting algorithm . but it has a couple ofdeficiencies which make it sometimes impractical . the main problem is that it requires extra spacefor merging them . we also saw that it is difficult to implement merge sort without using recursionand recursion carries its own cost in programming language . let us address the space problem . theextra space required by merge sort is actually required in order to implement the merge function andwhy do we need to merge ? the reason we need to merge is that when we do a merge sort , we havethe initial list and then we split it into two parts , but in general there may be items in the left whichare bigger than items in the right . for instance , if we had say even numbers in the left and the oddnumbers on the right then we have to merge by taking numbers alternatively from either side . so , ifwe could arrange that everything that is on the left side of our divided problem is smaller thaneverything on the right side of the divided problem , then we would not need to merge at all and thisperhaps could save us this problem of requiring extra space for the merge . how would we do divideand conquer without merging . assume that we knew the median value remember the median valuein a set is the value such that half the elements are smaller and half are bigger . we could move allthe values smaller than the median to the left half and all of those bigger than the median to theright half . as we will see this can be done without creating a new array in time proportional to thelength of the list . having done this rearrangement moving all the smaller values to the left half andthe bigger values to the right half then we can recursively apply this divide and conquer strategy andsort the right and the left half separately and since we have guaranteed that everything in the lefthalf is smaller than everything in the right half , this automatically means that after this divide andconquer step we do not need to combine the answers in any non trivial way because the left half isalready below the right half . so , we do not need to merge . if we apply this strategy then we wouldget a recursive equation exactly like merge sort . it would say that the time required to sort a list oflength n requires us to first sort two lists of size n by and we do order n not for merging , but inorder to decompose the list so that all the smaller values are in the left and in the right . so ,rearranging step before we do the recursive step is what is order n , whereas merge was the stepafter the recursive step which was order n in the previous case , but if we solve the recurrence , its thesame one , we get another order n log n algorithm . the big bottleneck with this approach is to findthe median . remember that we said earlier that one of the benefits of sorting a list is that we canidentify the median as the middle element after sorting . now here , we are asking for the medianbefore sorting , but our aim is to sort , it is kind of paradoxical . if we are requiring the output of thesorting to be the input to the sorting . this means that we have to try the strategy out with a moresimplistic choice of element to split the list . instead of looking for the median we just pick up somevalue in the list a , and use that as what is called a pivot element . we split a with respect to this pivotso that all the smaller elements are to the left and all the bigger elements are to the right . thisalgorithm is called quicksort , it was invented by a person called c.a.r hoare in the s and is oneof the most famous sorting algorithms . so , we choose a pivot element which is usually the firstelement in the list of the array . we partition a , into the lower part and the upper part with respect tothis pivot element . so , we move all the smaller elements to the left and all the bigger elements tothe right with respect to the choice of pivot element , and we make sure the pivot comes betweenthe two because we have picked up the first element in the array to pivot . so , after this we want tomove it to the center between the lower and the upper part and then , we recursively sort twopartitions . here is a high level view of how quicksort will work on a typical list . suppose this is ourlist , we first identify the beginning of the list , the first element as the pivot element . now , for theremaining elements we have to figure out which ones are smaller and which ones are bigger . so ,without going into how we will do this , we end up identifying , and as three elements whichare smaller and marked in yellow and the other four elements which are marked in green are larger .the first step is to actually partition with respect to this criterion . so , we have to move theseelements around so that they come into two blocks . so that , , and come to the left , ,and come to the right and the pivot element comes in middle . this is the rearranging stepand now we recursively sort the yellow bits and the green bits , then assuming we can do that , wehave a sorted array and notice that since all the yellow things are smaller than and all the greenthings are bigger than , no further merging is required . so let us look at how partitioning works .here , we have the earlier list and we have marked as our pivot element and we want to do a scanof the remaining elements and divide them into two groups those smaller than , the yellow onesthose bigger than , the green ones and rearrange them . what we will do is we will keep twopointers a yellow pointer and a green pointer and the general rule will be that at any given point wewill have at some distance , the yellow pointer which i will draw in orange to make it more visible andthe green pointer . these will move in this order the orange pointer or the yellow pointer will alwaysbe behind the green pointer and the inductive property that we will maintain is that these elementsare smaller than or equal to , these elements are bigger than and these elements are unknown .what we are trying to do is , we are trying to move from left to right and classify all the unknownelements each time we see an unknown element we will shift the two pointers so that we maintainthis property that between and the first pointer we have the elements smaller than or equal tobetween the first pointer and the second pointer we have the element strictly greater thanand to the right of the green pointer , we have those which are yet to be scanned . initially nothing isknown then we look at , since is smaller than the , we move the yellow pointer and we alsopush the green pointer along . so , the unknown things start from , and there is nothing betweenthe yellow and the green pointer indicating we have not yet found the value bigger than , samehappens for . now , when we see , we notice that is bigger than . now , we move only thegreen pointer and not yellow pointer , we have these three intervals as before . remember that this isthe part which is less than equal to this is the part that is greater than and this part isunknown . we continue in this way . now , we look at , again extends the green zone , extendsthe green zone , extends the green zone . now , we have to do something when we find . so , isan element which has to be put into the yellow zone , one strategy would be to do a lot of shifting .we move to where is or after and we push everything from onwards to the right , butactually a cleverer strategy is to say that must go here . so , we need to make space , but instead ofmaking space we can say , it does not matter to us , we are eventually going to sort the green thingsanyway . how does it matter which way we sort that , we will take this and just move it to . so ,instead of doing any shifting , we just exchange the first element in the green zone with the elementwe are seeing so far , that automatically will extend both yellow zone and the green zone correctly .so , our next step is to identify as smaller than and swap it with . now , we have reached anintermediate stage where to the right of the pivot we have scanned everything and we haveclassified them into those which are the smaller ones and those which are the bigger ones . now , itremains to push the yellow things to the left of . once again we have the same problem we sawwhen we included in the yellow zone . if we move to the correct place then we have to moveeverything here to the left , but instead we can just take this in the last element to the yellow zoneand replace it there and not shift and . this disturbs the order , but anyway this is unsorted , itjust remains unsorted . so , we do this and now we have the array rearrange as we wanted , all ofthese things to the left are smaller than the pivot the pivot is in the middle and everything to theright is bigger than the pivot . here is an implementation in python . so , remember that quicksort isgoing to have like merge sort and like binary search , we repeatedly apply it in smaller and smallersegments . in general , we have to pass to it the list which we call a , and the end points to thesegment the left and the right . if we have something that we are doing a slice l to r minus , if thisslice is or in length , we do nothing otherwise we follow this partitioning strategy we had before ,which is that we are sorting from l to r minus . the position l , this is the pivot . we will initially putthe yellow pointer here , saying that the end of the yellow zone is actually just the pivot , there isnothing there . so , yellow is l plus and now we let green proceed and every time you see anelement in the green the new green one which is smaller than the one which is the pivot . rememberthis is the pivot , if ever we see a green the next value to be checked is smaller than or equal to a lwe exchange so that we bring this value to the end of the yellow zone . this is what we did to andthen we move the yellow pointer as well , otherwise if we see a value which is strictly bigger , wemove only the green pointer which is implicitly done by the for loop and we do not move the yellow .at the end of this , we have the pivot then we have the less than equal to pivot and then we have thegreater than . so , this is that intermediate stage that we have achieved at the end of this loop . now ,we have to find the pivot and move it to the correct place . remember that the yellow , yellow ispointing to the position beyond the last element smaller than that . so , yellow is always one valuebefore , beyond this . so , we take the yellow minus value and exchange it with the left value andnow what we need to do is we have now less than p , p , greater than p and this is where yellow is . so ,we need to go from to yellow minus , we do not want to sort p again . because p is already put inthe correct place , so we quicksort from l to yellow minus and from yellow to the right end . here ,we have written the python code that we saw in the slide in a file . you can check that it is exactly thesame code that we had in the slide . we can try and run it and verify that it works . so , we call pythonand we import this function . remember that this is again a function which sorts in place . if you wantto sort something and see the effect we have to assign it a name and then sort that name and checkthe name afterwards . let us , for instance , take a range of values from say down to then if wesay quicksort l then we have to of course , give it the end then l gets correctly sorted . so , you can notsee all of it , but you can see from , up to up to . now , we have the same problem thatwe had with insertion sort . if we say and then we try to quicksort this , we will get this recursiondepth because as we will see , in the worst case actually , quicksort behaves a bit like insertion sortand this is a bad case . so , to get around this we would have to do the usual thing we have to importthe sys module and set the recursion limit to something superbly large , say , maybe ,and then if we ask it to quicksort there is no problem . this is another case where this recursion limitin python has to be manually set and one thing we can see actually is that quicksort is not as good aswe believe because if we were to , for instance , sort something of size say then it takes a visibleamount of time . we saw that merge sort which was n log n could do and and even, instantaneously . so , clearly quicksort is not behaving as well as merge sort and we will see infact , that quicksort does not have an order n log n behavior as we would have liked and that isbecause we are not using the median , but the first value to speak . we will see that in the nextlecture as to why quicksort is actually not a worst case order n log algorithm . in the last lecture welooked at merge sort and we informally claimed that it was much more efficient than insertion sortor selection sort and we claimed also that it operates in time order n log n. recall that merge sort asits base a merging algorithm which takes two sorted lists , a and b and combines them one at a timeby doing a scan over all elements . in order to analyze merge sort , the first thing we need to do is togive an analysis of the merge function itself . how much time does merge take in terms of the inputsizes of the two lists , a and b. so , suppose a has m elements and b has n elements and we want toput all these elements together into a single sorted list in c. remember that we had an iterationwhere in each step of the iteration we looked at , the first element in a and b and move the smallerof the two to c. so clearly c grows by one element with each iteration and since we have to move allm plus n elements from a and b to c , the size of c is m plus n. what do we do in each iteration ? wellwe do a comparison and then , we do an assignment and then , we increment some indices . so , this isa fixed number of operations . so , it is a constant . so , the total amount of work is proportional to mplus n. notice that m plus n is at most twice the maximum of m plus n. so , m is and n is , thenplus plus will be less than two times . we can say that merge as a function takes time of theorder of maximum of m and n and in particular very often like in merge sort , we are taking two listsof roughly the same size like we divide a list into two halves and then , we merge them . if both m andn are of the same , approximately the same size , then the max of m and n is just one of them in itself .essentially merge is linear in the size of the input list . now , having analyzed merge , let us look atmerge sort . so , merge sort says that if a list is small , has zero or one elements , nothing is to be done .otherwise you have to solve the problem for two half lists and then , merge them . as with anyrecursive function , we have to describe the time taken by such a function in terms of a recurrence .so , let us assume for now since we are going to keep dividing by that we can keep dividing bywithout getting an odd number in between . let us assume that the input n is some perfect power of. it is n is to the k. when we breakup merge sort into two lists , we have two lists of size n by . thetime taken for n elements is two times time taken for two list of n by and this is the mergecomponent . we have an order n step requires us to merge two lists of size n by and remember wejust said that merge is linear in the size of the input . so , we have two sub problems of size n by ,that is two times n by and we have merging which requires order n. as with binary search and withrecursive insertion sort , we can solve this recurrence by unwinding it . we start with the base case . ifwe have a list of size , then we have nothing to do . so , t of n is and t of n in general is two times tn by plus n. if we expand this out , we read substitute for t n by and we get two times t n byplus n by because that if we take this as a new input , this expands using the same definition and ifwe rewrite this . so , we write two times as square and we write this as two squared . we will findthat this is equivalent to writing it in this form into , squared t n by square and now noticethat you have two times n by over here . this and this will cancel . so , we have one factor n andthe other factor of n. the important thing is that you have here in the exponent and you havehere before the n. now , like wise what we will do in the next step is to expand this two times t n by. so , we expand two times t n by and that will give us another n by which you write as n cubewhich used to be squared n by square plus n will turn out to be cubed n by cube plusn. so , notice that the two s have become threes uniformly . so , in this way if we keep going after ksteps or j steps , we will have to the j times t n by to the j plus j times n. now , how long do wekeep doing this ? we keep doing this till we hit the base case . so , when j is log of n , where log by logwe usually mean log to the base , then n by to the j will be . so , t by t of n by to the j will alsobe . after log n steps , this expression simplifies to to the log n plus log n times n everywhere wehave a j , we put a log n and take this has become , so it has disappeared . we have to the j is tothe log n plus this j has log n and then , we have n and this is to the log n by definition is just n. so ,to the log n is n and we have n log n and by our rule that we keep the higher term when we do , wego n log n is bigger than n. we get a final value of o n log n for merge sort . merge turns out to be avery useful operation . what we saw was to combine two lists faithfully into a single sorted listinparticular our list if we had duplicates . so , if we merge say , and , , then we end up with thelist of the form , , , . this is how merge would work . it does not lose any information . it keepsduplicates and faithfully copies into the final list . on the other hand , we might want to have asituation where we want the union . we do not want to keep multiple copies and we want to onlykeep single copy . in the union case here is what we would do . let us assume that we have two listsand in general , we could have already duplicates within the lists . let us suppose that we have , , ,and , , then we do the normal merge . so , we move one here and now , when we hit twoelements which are equal , right then we need to basically scan till we finish this equal thing and copyone copy of it and then finally , we will put and then , and then . when a and a i is equal to b jwill increment both sides and make sure that we go to the end of that block . the other option is todo intersection . supposing we want to take , , and , , and come out with the answer , asthe common elements , then if one side is smaller than the other side , we can skip that elementbecause it is not there in both lists . so , if a i is less than b j we increment i , if b j is less than a i , weincrement j and if they are equal we will take union , we keep one copy of the common element . so ,merge can be used to implement various combinations , combination operations on this . it can beused to take the union of two lists and discard duplicates . it can be used to take the intersection oftwo lists and finally , as an exercise to test that you understand it and see if you can use merge to dolist difference . list difference is a following operation . if i have say , , , and i have , , , thenthis difference is all the elements in the first list which are not there in the second list . two is therehere and it is here , you remove , is there here and here remove . so , you should get , . so , ifthis is a , and this is b , then this is so called list difference a minus b. so , see if you can write a versionof merge which gives you all the elements in a which are not also in b , also known as list difference .now , merge sort is clearly superior to insertion sort and selection sort because it is order n log n , itcan handle lists as we saw of size , as opposed to a few thousand , but it does not mean thatmerge sort does not have limitations . one of the limitations of merge sort is that we are forced tocreate a new array , every time we merge two lists . there is no obvious way to efficiently merge twolists without creating a new list . so , there is a penalty in terms of extra storage . we have to doublethis space that we use when we start with lists and we want to sort it within merge sort . the otherproblem with merge sort is that it is inherently recursive and so , merge sort calls itself on the firsthalf and the second half . now , this is conceptually very nice . we saw that recursive definitions recrecursive functions are very naturally related to inductive definitions and they help us to understandthe structure of a problem in terms of smaller problems of the same type . now , unfortunately arecursive call in a programming language involves suspending the current function , doing a newcomputation and then , restoring the values that we had suspended for the current function . so , if wecurrently had values for local names like i , j , k , we have to store them somewhere and then , retreatthem and continue with the old values when the recursive call is done . this requires a certainamount of extra work . recursive calls and returns turn out to be expensive on their own time limits .so , it could be nice if we could have both the order n log n behavior of merge sort . and we could doaway with this recursive thing , but this is only a minor comment . but conceptually merge sort is thebasic order n log n sorting algorithm and it is very useful to know because it plays a role in manyother things indirectly or directly . last week , we saw two simple sorting algorithms , selection sortand insertion sort . these were attractive , because they corresponded to the manual way in which wewould sort items by hand . on the other hand , we analyzed these to see that the worst casecomplexity is order n squared where n is the length of the input list to be sorted . and unfortunately ,n squared sorting algorithms are infeasible for n over about , because it will just take too longand on the other hand , is the rather small number when we are dealing with real data . let usexamine a different strategy all together . suppose we had the example where you were teachingassistant and you were supposed to sort the answer papers for the instructor and supposing theinstructor had not one teaching assistant , but two teaching assistants . and the job is distributed tothe two teaching assistants , so each one is told to go with halves the papers , sort them separatelyand come back and then the instructor has to put these two lists together . in other words , you dividethe array initially , the unsorted array or list into two parts and then you hand over these two parts totwo different people or two different programs if you want to sort . so , you sort these two halvesseparately and now the key is to be able to combine these two sorted things efficiently in a singlesorted list . let us focus on the last part , how we combine two sorted lists into a single sorted list .now this is again something that you would do quite naturally . supposing you have the two outputsfrom the two teaching assistants then what you would do is you would examine of course , the toppaper in both . now , this top paper on the left hand side is the highest mark on the left hand side .the top paper on the right hand side is the highest mark on the right hand side . the maximumamong these two is a top overall . so , you could take the maximum say this one and move it aside .now you have the second highest on the right hand side and the first the highest on the left handside . again , you look at the bigger one and move that one here and so on . so , at each time , you lookat the current head or top of each of the lists and move the bigger one to the output , right . and ifyou keep repeating this until all the elements are over , you will have merged them preserving thesorted order overall . let us examine how this will work in a simple example here . so , we have twosorted lists , , and , , . so , we start from the left and we examine these two elementsinitially and pick the smaller of the two because we are sorting in ascending order . so , we pick thesmaller of the two that is and now the second list has reduced the two elements . at the next step ,we will examine the first element in the first list and the second element in the second list becausethat is what is left . among these two is smaller , so we will move . now is the smaller of thetwo at the end , now is the smaller of the two at the end . notice we have reached the situationwhere the second list is empty , so since the second list is empty we can just copy the first list as it iswithout having to compare anything because those are all the remaining elements that need to bemerged . having done this , now that we have a procedure to merge two sorted list into a singlesorted list we can now clarify exactly what we mean by merging the things using merge sort . so ,merge sort is this algorithm which divides the list into two parts and then combines the sorted halvesinto a single part . so , what we do is we first sort the left hand side . so , we take the positions fromto n by minus where n is the length . this is left and this is the right . now one thing to note is inpython notation , we use the same subscript here and here , because this takes us to the position n byminus and this will start at n by . so , we will not miss anything nor will we duplicate anything , soit is very convenient . this is another reason why python has its convention that the right hand side ofa slice goes up to the slice minus . if we write something like this we do not have to worry aboutwhether we have to do plus , minus , we can just duplicate the index of the right hand side and theleft hand side and it will correctly span the entire list . so , what we do is this is a naturally recursivealgorithm we recursively use this algorithm to sort the first half and the second half and then wemerge these two sorted halves into the output . the important thing is we keep repeatedly doing thesame thing we keep halving , sort the half , sort the other half and merge and when do we reach abase case where when we reach a list which has only one element or zero elements there is nothingto sort . when such a situation , we can just return the list as it is and then rely on merging to goahead . once again let us look at an illustrative example . supposing , we have eight items to sortwhich are organized like this . the first step is dividing it into two and sort each separately . so , wedivide it into two groups we have the left half and the right half . now these are still things , which wedo not know how to sort directly , so again we divide into two . the left half gets divided into twofurther subdivisions and so does the right . now we have list of length two , we could sort them byhand , but we say that we do not know how to sort anything except a list of length or , so wefurther break it up . now , we have trivial lists and on the left , and so on , so we end upwith eight lists of length one which are automatically sorted . at this stage , the recursion comes backand says , you have sorted the sub list for example , this list we have sorted the left into and theright into in a trivial way , so we need to combine them by merging . so , we merge and byapplying a merge procedure and we get before when we merge and they remain in thesame order . here come before and finally , comes before . now , at this level , we have twolists of lengths two which are sorted and so they must be merged and similarly here we have twolists of lengths two which are sorted and they must be merged . so , we merge the first pair , we getfollowed by , followed by , followed by . and similarly , here we get followed by followedby followed by . so , after doing these two merges we have now two lists of length four each ofwhich are sorted . and now we will end up picking from this and then so this is and then we willpick then we pick and then we pick then , then , then and then right . this is howthis recursion goes , you first keep breaking it up , down till the base case and then you keepcombining backwards using the merge . this strategy that we just outlined from merge sort is ageneral paradigm called divide and conquer . so , if you have a problem where you can break theproblem up into sub problems , which do not have any interference with each other . so , here forinstance , sorting the first half of the list and sorting the second half of the list can be doneindependently . you can take the papers assigned by the instructor , give them to two separateteaching assistants , ask them to go to two separate rooms they do not need to communicate witheach other to finish sorting their halves . in such a situation , you break up the problem intoindependent sub problems and then you have efficient way to combine the solved sub problems . sothat is the key there , how efficiently you can combine the problems . if you takes you a very long timeto combine the problems then it is not going to help you at all . but , if you can do it in a simple waylike this merge sort where we do the merging by just scanning the two lists from beginning to endand assigning each one of them to the final thing as we see it , then you can actually derive a lot ofbenefit from divide and conquer . let us look a little more in detail at the actual algorithmic aspect ofhow we are going to do this . first , since we looked at merging as the basic procedure , how do wemerge two sorted list . as a base case , if either of them is empty as we saw in the example , we do notneed to do anything we just copy the other one . so , we are taking two input lists a and b , which areboth sorted and we are trying to return a sorted list c. so , if a is empty , we just copy b into c if b isempty , we just copy a into c. otherwise , what we do is if both are not empty , so we want to take thesmaller one of the head of a and the head of b and move that to c , because that will be the smallestone overall in what is remaining . so , we compare the first element of a and b and we move thesmaller one into c and we keep repeating this until all the elements in a and b has been moved . thisis a python implementation of this merge function in general the two lists need not be the samelength . so , we are merging a of length m and b of length n into an output list of length c. initially , weset up m and n , because we need to keep track of how many elements we have moved in order todecide when to terminate . so , we set up m and n to point to the lengths of a and b respectively andwe initialize the output list to be the empty list , because remember that in python the type of c willonly be known after it is assigned a value . so , we need to tell it that initially the output merge list isan empty list , so that we can then use append to keep adding items to it . now what we are going todo is essentially start from the left hand side of both a and b , so we are going to start here and walkto the right as we go long we are going to move one of the two elements . so , we need an index topoint here , so we use the index i and j to point into a and b respectively . and initially , these indicespoint to the starting element which is . so , as we move along if we move i from to that means ,we have processed one element in a if we move it to we have processed three elements in a andso on . so , at any given time i plus j will tell us how many elements have been moved so far to theoutput eventually , everything in a and everything in b must be moved to the output . this will go onso long as i plus j is not reached the total m plus n which was the total number of elements we hadto move to begin with . while i plus j is less than m plus n , we have to look at different cases . the firsttwo cases are where one of the two lists is empty either we have reached the end of a , so i hasactually reached . so , remember the indices go from to m minus and to n minus . so , if i hasactually gone to m that means , that we have exhausted the elements in a. so , we append the nextelement in b and we keep going by incrementing the pointer in b or the index in b. similarly , if wehave reached the end of b , we append the next element a and we go back . now remember that atthis point because i plus j is less than m plus n , if we have finished m elements , but m plus n is notbeen reached , there must be some element in b. similarly , if we have finished i mean we havefinished n elements in b , but i plus j is not yet m plus n , there must be at least one element left in it .these two things will definitely work just by checking the fact that we have not finished all theelements , but one of the lists is exhausted . now , if neither list is exhausted then we have to do acomparison . so , we come to this case and we check whether the element in a is smaller than orequal to the element in b. so , at this point we are in general looking at some a i and some b j. so , wehave to decide which of these two goes into c next . the smaller of the two if it comes in a , weappend that to c at the increment i pointer otherwise , we append the b value increment the jpointer . at the end of this loop , what we would have done is to have transferred m plus n elements inthe correct order from a and b into c. let us just verify that this code that we have described worksin python as we expect . so , here is a file merge dot py in which we had exactly the same code as wehad on the slide . so , you can check that the code is exactly the same it goes through this loop while iplus j is less than m plus n and it checks the four cases an according to that copy is either in elementfrom a to c , or b to c and finally returns the list c. the simplest way to do this is to try and constructtwo lists suppose , we take a list of numbers where the even numbers from to . so , we start atand go to in steps of . and we might take the odd numbers from say to , so we do not havethe same length here right . the length of a is , the length of b is . and a has it 's in ascendingorder to in steps of b is to in steps of and in steps of again . now if we say merge a , b ,and then we get something which actually returns this merge list . notice that up to , which is thelast element in b , we get all the numbers . and then from here , we get only the even numbersbecause we are only copying from a. and if you want to check the length of the merge list then it iscorrectly plus is . if we go back and look at this code again , then it appears as though wehave duplicated the code in a couple of places . so , we have two situations case and case wherewe are appending the element from b into c and we are incrementing j. and similarly , we have twodifferent situations case and case , where we are appending the element from a into c and thenincrementing i. so , it is tempting to argue that we would have a more compact version of thisalgorithm , if we combine these cases . if we combine these cases then we can combine case and .remember one and four are the ones where we take the value from b. so , we combine and andsay either if a is empty or if b has a smaller value then you take the value from b and append it to cand say j equal to j plus . on the other hand , either if b is empty or a has a smaller value then youtake the value from a and append the index in that right . let us see what happens if we try to runthis code . here we have a file merge wrong dot py , the name suggests that is going to be a problem ,where we have combined case and , where we append the element from b into c and andwhere we combine the element append the element from a into c. let us run this and see . now , wetake merge wrong at the starting point . and let us just do a simple case . supposing we take a as , ,and b as , , then we have to expect , , , , , . let us try to merge a and b right and now weget an error which says that we have a list index out of range . list index out of range suggests that weare trying to access some element which is not present and it so happens that this is in the case if iequal to m or a i equal to b j , greater than b j. let us see if we can diagnose what is going on . onesimple way of diagnosing what is going on is to just insert some statements to printout the values ofthe names at some appropriate point . now here since we are having an error at inside the whileloop , what we have done is we have added the statement print which as i said we have not formallyseen we will see it in the next week . but it does the intuitive thing it take the names m , n , i and j andprints them out in that sequence on the screen , so that we can see what is happening . let us nowrun this again . so , we run the interpreter load this updated version of merge wrong . setup a and b asbefore . so , a is , , b is . and now we run merge . and now we see what is happening . so , mand n are the initial lengths and . and these are the values and are i and j the pointers . so , jbecomes then i become and so on . at this point , this is where the problem is right . what we havefound is that if i is equal to n or a i greater than b j , so i is not equal to m. so , i is not yet , so then itis trying to check whether a i is bigger than b j , but at this point unfortunately j is n. if we had hadthese cases in order we would have first checked if i is then if j is and only if neither of them arewould be a try to compare them . because now we are only checking if i is , since i is not we aregoing at and checking the value at a i against b j , but unfortunately j has become already and wehave not checked it yet . by combining these two cases , we have allowed a situation where we aretrying to compare a i and b j where one of them is a valid index and the other is not a valid index .although it looks tempting to combine these two cases one has to be careful when doing soespecially when we have these boundary conditions when we are indexing list , we must make surethat the index we are trying to get to is a valid index . and sometimes it is implicit and sometimes wehave to be careful and this is one of those cases where you have to be careful and not optimize thesethings . otherwise , we have to have a separate condition saying if i is equal to m or j is less than n andwhich becomes more complicated than the version we had with four explicit cases . so , we may aswell go back to the version with four explicit cases . now that we have seen how to merge the list , letus sort them . so , what we want to do is take a list of elements a and sort it into an output list b. so , ifn is or actually , so if it is empty or it has got length , we have nothing to do otherwise , we willsort the first half into a new list l and sort the second half into a new list r. l for left and r for right .and then we will apply the earlier merge function to obtain the output list b. this is a very simplefunction except that we are going to be sorting different segments or slices of our list . so , we willactually have merge sort within input list and the left and right endpoints of the slice to be sorted . ifthe slice of length or then we just return the slice as it is . it is important that we have to returnthat part of the slice and not the entire part a , because they are only sorting . remember when webroke up something into two parts , for example , right , so then at this point we have to return thesorted version of this slice , not the entire slice . so , we have to return a from left to right if it is a basecase otherwise , we find the midpoint then we sort recursively sort the portion from the left handside of the current slice to the midpoint , we put it in l. then we take the midpoint to the right , put itin r and we use our earlier function merge to get a sorted list out of these two parts l and r andreturn this . this is a very straight forward implementation there are no tricks or pitfalls here . theonly thing to remember is that we have to augment our merge sort function with these two things ,the left point and the right point . we had a similar thing if you remember for binary search , wherewe recursively kept having the interval to search . so , we have to keep telling it in which interval weare searching . let us look at a python implementation of merge sort . so , here we have a file mergesort dot py . we start with the function merge , which we saw before with a four way case split inorder to shift elements from a and b to c. and then we add at the bottom of the file , the newfunction merge sort which we saw on the previous slide which takes a slice of a from left to right andsorts it . if it is a trivial slice , it returns the slice as it is . otherwise , it breaks it into two parts andrecursively sorts that . let us see how this would actually run . we take python and we say from mergesort , import all the functions . and now let us take a larger range . suppose , if we take all the oddnumbers followed by all the even numbers . so , we say range to in steps of . those are the oddnumbers and then all the even numbers in the same range say . so , a has now odd numbers followedby even numbers . you would imagine that if i sort this from to the length of a , then you get thenumbers sorted in sequence . now what if i take a larger list then i get , again everything sorted .now our claim is that this is an order n log n algorithm . it should work well for even bigger list . if i saywhich remember would take a very long time with insertion sort or selection sort . question ishow long it takes here and it comes out quite fast . we can go further and say for example ,and even here it comes reasonably fast . so , we can see that we are really greatly expanded the rangeof lists that we can sort when moving to n log n algorithm because now merge sort can handle thingswhich are times larger , as suppose to a few then insertion sort or selection sort .another small point to keep in mind is notice that we did not run it to its recursion limit problem thatwe had with the insertion sort which we defined recursively . there for each element in the list , wewere making a recursive call . if we had elements , we have making a recursive calls andthen we have to increase the limit . now here even for , we do not have the problem and thereason is that the recursive calls here are not one per element , but one per half the list . so , we areonly making log n recursive calls . so , , elements also requires only log , . remember alog is about . so , we are making less than recursive calls , so we do not have a problemwith the recursion limit , we do not have any pending recursions of that depth in this function . wehave seen merge sort in action and we have claimed without any argument that is actually order nlog n and demonstrated that it works for inputs of size , . in the next lecture , we will actuallycalculate why merge sort is order n log n. for the last lecture of this week , we will look at recursivefunctions . recursive functions are typically based on what we call inductive definitions . so , inarithmetic many functions are naturally defined in an inductive way . let us explain this by someexamples . the first and most common example of a function defined inductively is the factorialfunction . so , we say that zero factorial is and then , we say that n factorial can be obtained from nminus factorial by multiplying by n. remember that n factorial is nothing but n into n minus into nminus product all the way down to . so , what we are observing is that after n , what appears canbe rewritten as n minus factorial . inductively n minus factorial can be extended to n factorial bymultiplying by the value n. so , we can also do this for other functions . you may remember or youmay not that multiplication is actually repeated addition when i say m times n , i mean m plus m plusm plus m , n times . so , how do we define this inductively well we say that m times is just m itselfand m times n plus is m plus inductively applying multiplication to n. we could equivalently writethis . if you want to be symmetric with the previous case as m times n is m plus m time n minus , thesame thing . what you are saying is that you can express m times n in terms of m times n minus andthen adding it . so , in both these cases what we have is that we have a base case . we have likefactorial or m times , where the values are given to us explicitly and then , we have an inductive stepwhere f of n is defined in terms of f of n minus and in general , it can be defined in terms of evenmore smaller arguments . so , one example of that is the fibonacci series . if you have seen thefibonacci series , the fibonacci series starts with and so on and this is obtained by taking theprevious two values and then adding . so , the general rule for fibonacci is that the first value is equalto the second value is equal to and after the second value fibonacci of n is fibonacci of n minusplus fibonacci of n minus . in general a recursive or inductive definition can express the value for nin terms of or smaller values of the function for smaller inputs . our interest in inductive definitionsis that an inductive definition has a natural representation as a recursive computation . let us look atfactorial . here is a very simple python implementation of factorial as it is defined , it checks the valuen and says that n is , then the return otherwise return the value n times the computationrecursively of factorial n minus . this is very clearly what we said before it says zero factorial isand otherwise if n is not , n factorial is n times n minus factorial . so , this is exactly what we wrotebefore directly translated as recursive computation . we can say the same for multiplication . you cansay if you want to multiply m by n , if n is , we return m otherwise we add m to the result ofmultiplying m by n minus . again we had written that before as m times is n and m times n is mplus m time n minus . if you have an inductive definition , it immediately gives rise to a recursivefunction which computes same definitions . the advantage is that we do not have to spend muchtime arguing that this function is correct because it directly reflects the inductive definitions , themathematical definitions of the function we are trying to compute . now , what may be less obvious isthat we can do the same thing for structures like list . a list has an inductive structure a list can bethought of as being built up from an empty list by adding one element at a time . so , we can think ofdecomposing a list , reversing the step . so , we start building a list from an empty list by adding oneelement at a time say we add them to the left . we add the last element and we add the second lastelement and so on . but conversely we can say that given a list we can decompose it by taking say thefirst element and looking at that first element and the remaining list after removing the first elementwhich has one less element . this gives us our induction we have a smaller structure on which we cantry to express a function and then we can combine it with the first element to get the value for thelarger thing . so , we will have a base case where the function is a defined either for the empty list orfor the simple list of size and in the inductive step f of l will be defined in terms of smaller sublistsof l. again this is best understood through some simple definitions suppose we want to compute thelength of the list l. well the base case if the list is empty it has zero length . if l is equal to l is equalto the empty list , we return otherwise what we do is we have a list consisting of a number ofvalues . so , we pull out this first value and we say it contributes one to the length and now inductivelywe compute the length of the rest , right . we return plus the length of the slice starting at positionone . this is an inductive definition of length which is translated into a recursive function and onceagain by just looking at the structure of this function , it is very obvious that it computes the lengthcorrectly because this is exactly how you define length inductively . now here is another functionwhich does something similar except instead of computing the length , it adds up all the numbersassuming that list is a list of numbers . again if i have no numbers to add , if i have an empty list , thenthe sum will be because i have nothing to put into this sum . on the other hand , if i do have somenumbers to add , well the sum consists of taking the first value and adding it to the rest . if i have a listcalled x , x up to x n , then i am saying that this is x plus the sum of x up to x n. i can get thissum by this recursive or inductive call . then , i just add this value to that . insertion sort which wehave seen actually has a very nice inductive definition . if we have a list of size or size , it is alreadysorted . we do not have to do anything , so this becomes the base case . on the other hand , if we havea list of length two or more , we inductively sort the slice from the beginning up to , but excluding thelast position . this is slice from to length of the list minus , then we take the last position and then ,this should be minus . so , we take the value at the last position and we insert it into the sorted slice .we insert the last position into the inductively sorted slice excluding the last position . here is arecursive definition of insertion sort in python . the natural thing in python or in any other thingwould be to say that we want to insert the last position into the result of sorting the sequence up to ,but excluding the last position , but the way we have written our insertion sort this function does notreturn a list . it sorts this thing in place . this call would not have the correct type because insert willtake a sequence and a position and insert this value at this position to its left . so , we write it now astwo separate things . first of all we have an overall insertion sort which takes a sequence and it willcall this auxilliary function which says sort this sequence up to this position . so , isort sorts the slicefrom up to k minus . so , what does isort say ? isort checks if is the base case if k is or k is . if iam sorting up to the first position or i am not sorting anything at all , right then i will just return thesequence . this is telling me sort from to k minus . if it is , then i have an empty list . if i have to, then i have a list of one position , it is only if i have to that i have at least two elements . and ifso , what i do is i sort k minus positions and i insert the last position into this sequence . what doesinsert do ? insert does exactly what we did when we did the regular insertion sort . it sets a positionvariable or name to the last position and walks left and keeps swapping . so long as it has not reachedthe left hand side h and so long as it finds something to the left which is strictly bigger than the onethat you looking at . so , this is what we did earlier . what is new is this part which is this recursive call ,it says sort the sequence up to this position , recursively using the same isort but change the indexfrom k to k minus and then insert the current value into this sequence . so , as before let us run thisin python . here is the code isort rec dot py which contains this recursive implementation of insertionsort . so , if i now import this , then as before if we say l is a range of values say , in descendingorder , then if we apply insertion sort to this , then l produces the ascending order to . last timewe said that for n squared sort , we should look at larger values . supposing we take range , nowif we take range , then something surprising happens . we get an error message from pythonsaying that it could not sort this because it reached something called the maximum recursion depth .so , what happens when we make a recursive call is that the current function is suspended . we try tosort something of length . it will try to insert the th element into the result of sorting thefirst . so , we suspend the first call and try to sort . this in turn will try to insert the thelement into sorting the first . so , it will suspend that and try to sort the first . at each timewe make a recursive call , the current function is suspended and a new function is started . so , this iscalled the depth of recursion . how many functions have we suspended while we are doing thisprocess ? now unlike some other languages , python imposes a limit on this and the limit as we cansee is clearly less than because we are not able to sort a list of using this particularmechanism . so , how do we get around this ? well , first of all , let us try and see what this limit is . weknow that we can not sort , but we could sort . so , can we sort for example , it turns outthat we can sort . now , it will turn out that , for instance , we can sort . so , we can actually findthis limit by doing what we did earlier binary search . we can keep halving although i did not strictlyhalve after . i know it fails at , it does not fail at , i should have tried , but i will spareyou this binary search and i can show you that if i use , then it will work , but i use , then it willfail . so , somewhere around is the recursion limit that python uses by default . now , fortunatelythere is a way to get around this . so , you can set this recursion limit and the way you do it is thefollowing . you first have to import a bunch of functions which are called system dependent functionsby saying import sys and then , in sys there is a function called set recursion limit and we can set thisto some value bigger than this say . now , if we for instance ask it to sort a list of , then itdoes not give us error . same way , i could even say because will also only create the samekind of limit because it is well under . remember that in this we are basically doing recursionexactly the number of times as there are elements because we keep inserting , inserting , insertingand each insertion requires us to recursively sort the things to its left . that is why we get the stack ofnested recursions , but the thing to remember is that by default , python has an upper bound on thenumber of nested recursions which is less than , if you want to change it you can by setting thisrecursion limit explicitly , but python does not allow you to set it to an unbounded value . you mustgive it an upper bound . so , you can not say let recursion run as long as it needs to . you have to havean estimate on how much the recursion will actually take on the inputs you are giving , so that youcan set this bound explicitly . now , the reason that python does this is because it wants to be able toterminate a recursive computation in case you have made a mistake . a very common mistake withrecursive computation , it is a bit like we said for while loops , if we never make the condition false , awhile loop will execute forever . same way if we do not set the base case correctly , then a recursivecomputation can also go on forever . the way that python stops this and forces you to go andexamine the code is by having a recursion limit saying beyond a certain depth , it will refuse toexecute the code . so , what we have seen is that we have this recursion limit and we can raise itmanually by importing this sys module and setting the set recursion limit function inside sys . so howwould we analyse the complexity of recursive insertion sort ? so as before , we use t of n to denotethe time it takes to run insertion sort on an input of length n. insertion sort at the highest levelconsists of two steps . we first have to sort the initial slice of length n minus and by definition , thiswill take time t of n minus and then , we need n minus steps in the worst case to insert the lastposition into the sorted slice . this gives rise to what we call a recurrence . we saw this when we werelooking at how to analyse binary search which was also a recursive algorithm . we have that t n ingeneral is n minus plus t of n minus and t of when we come to the base case is . as with thebinary search , we can solve this by expanding or unwinding the recurrence . so , we have t of n is nminus plus t n minus . if we take t n minus and apply the same definitions , we get n minusplus t n minus . then , we take t n minus and apply the same definition , we get n minus and t nminus and this will keep going on until we get t of n minus k is equal to t of . in other words whenk becomes n after n steps , we will have . so , we will have n minus plus n minus down to whichis the same thing we had for the iterative version of insertion sort n into n minus by and this isorder n squared . we have seen two order n squared sorting algorithms both of which are verynatural intuitive algorithms which we do by hand when we are giving sorting tasks to perform selection sort and insertion sort . we have also seen that both of these will not work in general if wehave large values of n and not even so large if we have values of n over . but we also saw in theprevious two lectures that insertion sort is actually slightly better than selection sort becauseselection sort , the worst case is always present because we always have to scan the entire slice inorder to find the minimum value element to move into the correct position where insertion sort willstop as soon as it finds something which is in the correct order . so if we have a list which is alreadysorted , then insertion sort will actually work much better than n squared , but we can not rely on this ,and anyway we are counting worst case complexity . so , we have to take the fact that both of thesewill in general not work very well for lists larger than elements . what we will see next week isthat there are substantially more efficient sorting algorithms which will allow us to sort much largerlists than we can sort using selection sort or insertion sort . in the previous lecture we saw onenatural strategy for sorting , which you would apply when we do something by hand namely selectionsort . now let us look at another natural strategy which all of us use at some point . so , the secondstrategy is as follows we have now a stack of papers remember with marks on them and we have tocompute a new stack which has this marks arranged in descending order from top to bottom . so , wewill take the first paper of the stack we have and create a new stack by definition this new stack isnow sorted because it has only one paper . now we pick the second paper from the old stack and welook at its marks as compared to the first paper that we pulled out . if it is smaller , we put it below ifit is higher , we put it above . so , in this process , we now have the new stack of two papers arranged indescending order . what do we do with the third paper , well the third paper can be in one of threepositions it can either be bigger than the two we saw before . so it can go on top , or it could be inbetween the two , or it could go below . so , what we do is we scan from top to bottom and so longer ifit is smaller than the paper we have seen , we push it down until we find a place where it fits . weinsert the paper that we pick up next into the correct position into the already sorted stack we arebuilding . so , keep doing this for each subsequent paper , we will take the fourth paper and insert intoa correct position among the remaining three and so on . this is obviously called insertion sort . so , letus see how it would work . so , what we do with this same list that we had for selection sort is we willpick up the first value and move it to the new stack saying now i have a new stack which has exactlyone value namely . then when i pick up , since smaller than , i push it to the left of .now is bigger than both , so i keep it on top of the stack at the right end , i have to now lookwith respect to and , so it is smaller than . so , it goes to the left of then i look at it issmaller than it goes to the left of that . so , eventually it settles down as , , , . , similarlyi have to start from the top and say it is smaller than smaller than smaller than smaller than, so it goes all the way to the left . and finally , will move down to positions past and and, but it will stop above . so , this is how insertion sort would build up a new list . you keep pickingup the next value and inserting it into the already sorted list that you had before . we start building asort sorted sequence with one element pick up the next unsorted element and insert it in to acorrect place into the already sorted sequence . we can do this as we did with insertion sort withoutbuilding a new sequence , and here is a function insertion sort defined in python which does this . so ,what we will assume is that at any given point , we have our sequence from to n minus and thereare some positions , so that up to this point everything is sorted . and now what i will do is i will pickup the next element here and i will move it left until i find the correct place to put it , so that now thesorted thing extends to this length right . so , we take a sorted sequence of length i and we extend itto a sec sorted sequence like i plus by inserting in the i plus one th position in the current list . so ,we are going to take this position the slice end right , the slice end is going to be the last position thatwe have sorted already . so , this is supposed to be slice end . so , we say sliceend it starts from thevalue and goes up to the n minus th position . and at each time , we look at the value at . actuallythe slice is up to sliceend minus sorry . so , sliceend is a number of elements that we have sorted .we look at the value immediately after that which will be in the position called sliceend and so longas this position is bigger than and if the value at that position is strictly smaller than the value atthe previous position , we exchange these two right . so , what we were doing is that we are saying wedraw it again . we have an already sorted slice to from to slice n minus , and we have this positionsliceend . we then assume that this is sorted . so , we compare with this value and if this is smallerthen we exchange it . now if you have exchanged it that means , that this value has now gone here .now , we again a compare it to the previous value , and if it is smaller we exchange it . so , again thismeans that it goes one more position . we just keep going until we find that at this position the valueto the left of it is equal to or bigger than this sorry equal to or smaller than this . so , we should notswap it and we have it in the correct position right , so that is what this is doing . so long as you havenot reached the left hand end , you compare the value you are looking at now to the value to its leftwith the value to its left is strictly bigger , this one must exchange and then you decrement theposition . let us run this the way we have written it on this particular sequence . so , what we do is weinitially assume that this thing is unsorted . so , our first thing is here . and so when we sort it , we justget a sorted list of length one which is . then we look at this and we must insert it into this list .so since this is smaller than , it gets exchanged and we get now new sorted list , and now wemust insert into this list right and now we see is bigger than , so nothing happens . this listnow i sorted from to , now we try to insert in this . we first compare it with this , and this willsay that is smaller than the value to its left , so we must exchange . now we will compare againto the value to its left again , we will exchange . now we will compare to the value to its left andthere is no change . now we have a sorted list of length . similarly , we will take right , and we willcompare it to since is smaller than , it will swap since is smaller than , it will againswap since is smaller than , it will swap since is smaller than , it will swap , but now theposition sorry will swap and now the position is . so , we stop not because we have found somethingto the left which is bigger , but because we have nothing to the left . we have two conditions if youremember that algorithm is said that either pos should be positive , the position should be greaterthan or we should compare it to the value on its left right . in this case , we have no value to its left ,so we stop . how do we analyze this ? well , at each round , what are we doing , we are inserting a newvalue into a sorted segment of length k. so , we start with the length segment , we insert one valueto it , we get a sorted length of sequence of length one , we insert a value into that we get a sortedsequence of length two and so on . where in the worst case , when we are inserting we have to takethe value all the way to the beginning of the segment . sorting a segment of length k in the worstcase takes k steps , so again we have the same recurrence not expression that we had for selectionsort says that t of n is plus plus up to n minus which is n into n minus by which is order nsquare . so , again remember that this is n square by minus n by and so this is the biggest term andthat is what we get . once again let us see how insertion sort actually works in the python interpreterand we will see something slightly different from selection sort when we run it . first , let us look atthe code . this is the code that we saw in the slide . we just keeps scanning segments , keeps taking avalue at a position and inserting it into the already sorted sequence up to that position . if we startthe python interpreter , and say import this function , then as before if we for example , take a long listand sort it then l becomes sorted . so , before l was in descending order . now we sort it , and now l isin ascending order . now as before what we said is that if we try to do this for a length of aroundthen it will be much smaller and much slower right . so , you can see it takes a long time and that isbecause insertionsort , it is again order n square sort . so , though it does it eventually it takes a longtime , but there is a small difference here . so , suppose we do it the other way , suppose we take a listwhich is already sorted , and now we ask it to sort , then it comes back instantly . why should this bethe case well think about what is happening now the list is already in sorted order . so , when we tryto take a value at any position and move it to the left , it immediately finds that the value to its left issmaller than it , so no swapping occurs . so , each insert step takes only one iteration . it does not haveto go through anything beyond the first element in order to stop the insert step . so , actually if wetake even a large value like , or even this should work . insertion sort when you alreadyhave a sorted list will be quite fast because the insert step is instantaneous whereas this does nothappen with selection sort . because in selection sort , in each iteration we have to find the minimumvalue in a cell in a sequence and with no prior knowledge about what the sequence looks like it willalways scan the sequence from beginning to end . the worst case for selection sort , will happenregardless of whether the input is already sorted or not whereas insertion sort if the list is sorted ,the insert step will be very fast , and so you can if actually sort larger things . in that sense insertionsort can be behave much better than selection sort even though both of them technically in theworst case are order n squared sorts . we have seen that searching becomes more efficient if wehave a sorted sequence . so , for an unsorted array or a list , the linear scan is required and this takesorder n time . however , if we have a sorted array we can use binary search and have the interval wehalf to search with each scan and therefore , take order log n time . now sorting also gives us as abyproduct some other useful information . for instance , the median value the median value in a setis a value such that half the value is a bigger and half are smaller . once we have sorted a sequence ,the midpoint automatically gives us the median . we can also do things like building frequency tablesor checking for duplicates , essentially once we sort a sequence all identical values come together asa block . so , first of all by checking whether there is a block of size two , we can check whether there isa duplicate in our list and for each block , if we count the size of the block , we can build a frequencytable . let us look at some ways to sort sequences . so , forget about arrays and list for the moment ,and let us think of sorting as a physical task to be performed . suppose you are a teaching assistantfor a course , and the teacher or the instructor has finished correcting the exam paper and now wantsyou to arrange them , so that the one with the largest marks the highest marks is on top , the onewith the second highest mark is below and so on . so , your task is to arrange the answer papers aftercorrection in descending order of marks , the top most one should be the highest mark . here is onenatural strategy to do this . so , what we can do is repeatedly look for the biggest or the smallestpaper . now in this case , we are going to build up the stack from the bottom , if the highest mark is onthe top then the lowest mark will be at the bottom . so , what we do is we scan the entire stack , andfind the paper with minimum marks . how do we do this , where we just keep looking at each paper inturn , each time we find a paper with the smaller mark then the one we have in our hand we changeit and replace it by the one we have just found . at the end of the scan , in our hand we will have thepaper with a minimum marks . initially , we assume that the top most paper has the minimum marksand we keep going down and replacing it with any lower mark we find . after this scan , we take thepaper we have in our hand and put it aside and make a second stack where this is the bottom mostthing . now we have n minus paper , we repeat the process . we look for the minimum markamongst these n minus papers and put this second lowest mark over all on top of the one we justput . now , we have two papers stacked up , in order as we keep doing this we will build up the stackfrom bottom to top which has the lowest mark at the bottom , and the highest mark on the top .suppose these are papers . so , we have papers with mark , , , , and . if we scan thislist from left to right , then we will find that is the lowest mark . so , our strategy says pick up theone with the lowest mark and move it to a new sequence or a new stack , so we do that . now again ,we scan from left to right this time of course is gone , so we only have five numbers to scan . wewill find that is our next . and then proceeding in this way at the next step we will pick up andthen and then , and finally . in this way by doing six scans on our list of six elements , we havebuild up a new sequence which has these six elements ordered according to their value . thisparticular strategy which is very natural and intuitive has a name is called selection sort , because ateach point we select the next element in sorted order and move it to the final sorted list which is incorrect order . in the algorithm that we executed just now , we needed to build up a second list or asecond sequence to store the sorted values . so , we kept pulling out things from the first sequence ,and putting it in the second sequence . however , a little bit of thought will tell us that we do not needto do this . whenever we pull out an element from the list as being the next smallest , we can move itto the beginning where it is supposed to be and exchange it with what is at the beginning . we canswap the minimum value with the value in the first position , after this we look at the second positiononwards and find the second minimum value and swap it to the second position and so on . so , if wewere to execute this modified algorithm on the same input that we had before . in our first scan , wewould start from the left in the first position is , and the minimum is at . now , instead of movingto a new list , we will now swap and . so , comes in the beginning and goes to theposition where was . now we no longer have to worry about anything to do with , we only needto look at this slice if you want to call it that starting from . we do this and we find the secondsmallest element . now , the starting element is and the second smallest element also happens tobe that is the smallest element in this slice . so , we just keep where it is . now we start the nextslice from position two . the beginning element is but the smallest element is . so , havingfinished this scan we would say should move to the third position and should replace it . thisway we just keep going on . now we put where is , and finally is in the correct place and isalso in the correct place . and we have a sorted sequence using selection sort where instead ofmaking a second sequence , we have just systematically moved the smallest element we have foundto the start with the segment or section that we are looking at right now . here is the very simplepython function which implements selection sort . the main idea about selection sort is that we havethis sequence which has n elements to begin with . the first time , we will scan the entire sequence ,and we would move this smallest element to this point . then we will scan the sequence from oneonwards , then we will scan the sequence on two onwards , and at each point in whichever segmentwhere we are we will move the smallest element to the beginning . we have this starting points ofeach scan , so the starting point initially starts at , and then it goes to , up to the length of l minus. so , for the starting values from , implicitly this is remember , to the length of l minus , we firstneed to find the minimum value . we assume that the minimum value is at the beginning of thatposition of this slice . so we said the minimum position to be the starting position remember thestarting position is varying from to the length of l minus . so , each slice the starting position is thefirst position of the slice we have currently looking at . then we scan from this position onwards andif we find a strictly smaller value . if l of i is smaller than what we correctly believe is the minimumvalue , we replace the minimum position by the current index . in this way after going through thisentire thing , we would have found that say this position is the position of the minimum value . thenwe need to exchange these two , so we take the start position and the min position and we do thissimultaneous walk , which we have seen before we take two values we exchange them using this pairnotation . let us see how much time this takes . in each iteration or in each round of this , we arelooking at a slice of length k , and we are finding the minimum in that and then exchanging it with thebeginning . now we have an unsorted sequence of values of length k , we have to look at all them tofind the minimum value , because we have no idea where it is . we can not stop at any point anddeclare that there are no smaller values beyond this . so , to find the minimum in an unsortedsegment of length k , it requires one scan of k steps . and now we do this starting with the segment ofthe entire slice that is slice of length n then a slice of length n minus and so on . and so , if we writeas usual t of n to be the time it takes for an input of size n to be sorted using selection sort this willbe n for the first slice , n minus for the second slice on i mean position one onwards , n minus forthe position two onwards and so on . and if i add this all up we have this familiar sum plus plusup to n , which you will hopefully remember or you can look up is given by this expression n into nplus by . now n into n plus by , if we expand it becomes n square by plus n by . now this bigo notation which tells us that it is proportional to n square when we have expressions like this whichhave different terms like n , n square , n cube , it turns out that we only need to record the highestterm . since , n square is the highest term n square grows faster than n , we can simplify this to o nsquare . if you want to see why this is so , you should look up any standard algorithms book , it willexplain to you how you calculate big o , but for our purposes it is enough to remember that big o justtakes the highest term in the expression that we are looking at . we said that for sorting algorithmlike selection sort , which takes order n square will not work for the very large value say for lengthlarger than about . so , let us look at how this things works . first , this is the same code that wehad in the slide , so selection sort scan slices from up to the length of l minus . let us start thepython interpreter . and now we will load selection sort from this file . now notice the way selectionsort works , it does not actually return a value that what selection sort does is it takes the value thatthe list that is passed to it and it sorts it in place . in order to see anything from this , we have to firstgive it a name . so , let us take a list such as , , , for example , and say selection sort of l. and nowwe look at l , it is correctly sorted in the ascending order as , , and . now in general we can take alonger list . for instance , we can use this range function and say give me the list which is created bytaking the range say from to with step of minus . so , this is an descending list of length . ifi look at l , it is down to . and now if i say insertion uh selections sort of l , then it gets sorted asto . now our claim is that this will stop working effectively around . so , let us see if i makethis as instead of , and run selection sort then you can see there is an appreciable gap . nowif i do it for say , then there is slightly longer gap . if i do it for then you can see it takes alittle bit of time right it takes more than one second for sure . this is just to validate our claim that inpython if you expect to do something in one second then you better make sure that the number ofsteps is below about to the . and since square takes you well beyond to the , you canexpect to take a very long time . when we looked at binary search , we talked about how efficient itwas . so let us just spend a little bit of time informally understanding how we look at efficiency ofalgorithms . in general an algorithm will work on many different sizes of inputs , so it makes sense totalk about the efficiency as a function of the input size . the input size is n we will use a function suchas t of n to talk about that time taken on an input of size n. of course , even of the same size ,different inputs will take different time for an algorithm to execute , so which of these should wetaken as our measure of efficiency . the convention is to use the worst case behavior . among all theinputs of size n which one will force our algorithm to take the longest time , and this is what we callusually the worst case efficiency . now in the case of searching for instance , binary search or even alinear scan , we said that the worst case would occur typically when the value that we are trying tofind is not found in this sequence . so , we actually have to scan through the entire sequence or arrayor list before we find it in case of a linear scan . and in terms of a binary search we have to reduce thesearch interval to a trivial interval before we can declare that the value is not there . so that is theworst case . now , it may turn out that in many algorithms the worst case is rare . it may not be arepresentative idea about how bad or good the algorithm is and may be it could be better to givesomething like the average case behavior . now unfortunately in order to determine something likean average case in a mathematically precise way is not easy , we have to have a probabilitydistribution over all inputs and then measure different inputs and different outputs and thencompute a probabilistic mean for this . so in most cases this is not possible which is why we settle forthe worst case efficiency . when we talk about efficiency , as we said we are broadly interested in theconnection between input size and output size so we express this up to proportionality . so we arenot really interested in exact constants we want to know for instance is t of n proportional to log ofn , for example in the case of binary search or n in the case of linear scan or larger values like n log n ,n squared , n cubed , or is it even exponentially dependent on the input , is it to the n. we write thisusing this , what is called the big o notation . so when you say t of n is big o of n what we mean isthat t of n is some constant times n. same way t of n is big o n log n means t of n is some constanttimes n log n. in other words , is proportional by some constant to that value . so , we are not going togo into much detail in this course about how big o is defined and calculate it , but it is a useful shorthand to describe the efficiency of algorithms . so we will use it informally and you can go and read analgorithms text book to find out how it is more formally defined . in terms of this notation when wesay that linear scan is proportional to the length of an array or a list we can say that linear scan takestime big o of n. in the same way for a sorted array binary search will take time big o log of n. so , hereis a table which tabulates for different values of input n what would be the corresponding values oflog n , n , n log n , n squared and so on . and what we want to probably estimate is given these values ,these absolute numbers , what could be reasonable inputs that we can expect to compute within afew seconds . now if we type something on our computer and we do not get a response very soonthese days we realize that something may be wrong . so , let us say we want to see the input in one ortwo seconds otherwise we will deem it to be inefficient . so , if we look at this , we have to now figureout how fast our computers are . so , by some simple hand experiments you can validate that pythoncan do about to the basic steps in a second . so what we can do is try and execute a large loopand see how much time it takes . here we have a bunch of programs if you already written and hereis a template . so if i say look at speed dot py . it basically executes a loop to the times , hencethe name . so , for m in range to minus , it just assigns m to be the value i and finally thereis this statement we have not seen so far , but it should be quite intuitive which says print the value ofn. in the same way speed does this for to the times , speed does this to the times , speeddoes this to the times and so on . these are a bunch of scripts we have written for python fromspeed to speed . now if you are working in unix or in linux there is a nice command called time .first of all i can take python and i can take directly use a name of the python program like this . so , ican say python . and give the name of this script and it will execute it and give you the answer . butnow in addition there is also a useful command called time . so , time tells us how much time thisthing takes to execute and it typically reports this in three quantities real time , user time , andsystem time . so , what we really need to look at is the so called user time it says that if i do this loopto the times it takes us fraction of a second . seconds . if i do this on the other hand times ,then it goes from . to . . so , it is roughly a factor of as you would imagine which isreasonable . if i do this point times then again it goes up not quite by a factor of , but it is gone upto about . seconds . now we come to the limit that we claim to the . so , if we run speed dotpy , which is the loop to the it takes about second . i mean this is not a precise calculation , but ifyou run it repeatedly you say at each time , because there are some other factors like how long ittakes for the system to load the python interpreter and all that , but if you just do it repeatedly yousee that the to the takes about the second or more . this is the basis of my saying that pythoncan do about to the operations in a second . and just to illustrate , if you actually do it for tothe you can see it takes a very long time , and in fact it takes roughly to seconds to execute sosoon we would hopefully see the output . as you can see seconds does not seem to us like a verylong time , but it is a enormously long time when you are sitting in front of a screen waiting for theresponse . so what we claim now is that , something that takes a couple of seconds is what we willdeem as an effective input that we can solve on our computer . so , coming back to our table assumingthat to the is the limit that we are looking at , let us see what happens when we mark of tothe on these different columns . it turns out as something takes log n of time then even for tothe it takes only steps and we are fine . of course , if input is linear then we are ignoring theconstant then the input of size to the will take , so this line comes here . on the other hand ifwe have n log n. now it turns out that n log n , so it is useful to know that to the as wementioned before is . therefore , to the will be to the power , and to the will beto the power . here the log grows linearly as this thing grows in terms of powers of . so , when wehave to the then the log is going to be something like something , so it is going to be of theorder of , its going to drop one . so , that is why we say that for input of size to the , here thelog is going to contribute a factor of so that is going to take time to the . now notice thatwhen you do square then to the is already going to take to the . so , somewhere betweenand say around may be if you are lucky will be the feasible limit for somethingwhich takes n squared time . and as we go to n cubed the limit drops from a few thousand to a fewhundred . so , here we have between to the and to the . so , somewhere between andthe scaling goes from to the to to the , so where to the will be somewherearound or . when you get to the exponentials like to the n and n factorial , then unless youhave an input that is really small like or something like that we are going to hit problems , becausewe have a few tens you already get to enormous numbers like to the . this gives us an idea thatgiven that our system that we are working which python can do about to the steps in a second ,we need to really examine this table to understand what kind of inputs will be realistic to processgiven the time type of algorithm that we are executing . now python is to the . python is a bitslower than other languages , but even if you are using a very fast language like c or c you can notrealistically expect to go beyond to the or to the . so this table is more or less valid up to ascaling of a few tens in different languages . so , you can take this as a reasonable estimate acrosslanguages . theoretically if you look at algorithms books or complexity theoretic books , anypolynomial , any dependence on n which is of the form n to the k for a constant k is consideredefficient . these are the so called polynomial time algorithms . so n cubed , n to the , n to the , all ofthese are considered to be theoretically efficient algorithms as compared to to the n and so on . soyou have n to the versus to the n. so , n to the is considered efficient , to the n is not . but whatthe table tells us if you look at the previous table , is that even n square has a very severe limit , wecan only do about to . if you are doing something in n squared time we can not processsomething larger than a few thousands . now many of the things that we see in real life , like if wehave a large spreadsheet or we have anything like that and we want to sort it then it is very likely tohave a few thousand entries . supposing , even if you want to just look at all the employees in amedium sized company or all those children in a class and in a school or something like that , a fewthousands is not at all a large number . therefore , what we see is that if we go beyond that an nsquared algorithm would take enormously long time to compute . so really we have to think veryhard about what are the limits of what we can hope to do and that is why it is very important to usethe best possible algorithm . because by using something which is better you can dramaticallyimprove the range of inputs on which your algorithm works . we have seen several situations wherewe want to store a sequence of values . now it turns out that in a program or in a programminglanguage implementation , there are two basic ways in which we can store such a sequence . theseare normally called arrays and lists . so , let us look at the difference between arrays and lists . anarray is usually a sequence which is stored as a single block in memory . so , you can imagine if youwish that your memory is arranged in certain way and then you have an array , so usually memoriesarranged in what are called words . word is one unit of what you can store or retrieve from memory ,and an array will usually be one continuous block without any gaps . and , in particular this wouldapply when an array has only a single type of value , so all the elements in the sequence are eitherintegers or floats or something where the length of each element of the array is of a uniform size . wewould also typically in an array no in advance how big this block is . so we might know that it has sayentry , so we have a sequence of size . now when this happens , what happens is that if youwant to look at the jth element of a sequence or the ith element of a sequence , then what you wantto think of is this block of memory starting with , , , up to i right and you want to get to the ithelement quickly . but since everything is of a uniform size and you know where this starts , we knowwhere the sequence starts you can just compute i times this size of one unit and quickly go and oneshot to the location in the memory where the ith element is saved . so , accessing the ith element ofan array just requires arithmetic computation of the address by starting with the initial point of thearray and then walking forward i units to the ith position . and this can be done in what we could callconstant time . by constant time what we mean is it does not really depend on i. it is no easier or nodifficult to get the last element of an array as it is to get to the second element of an array , it isindependent of i. it takes the fixed amount of time to get to sequence of y for any i. now , oneconsequence of this is inserting or contracting arrays is expensive , because now if i have an arraywith to and i want to add a new value here say at position i then first of all this array nowbecomes from to and now everything which is after i has to be shifted to accommodate spaceif we want to keep the same representation with the entire array is stored as a single block . so , whenwe have a single block of memory though it is efficient to get to any part of it quickly it is not veryefficient to expand it because we have to then shift everything . the worst case for example , if thisgreen block comes into th position then the entire array has to be shifted down by one position . inthe same way contraction is also expensive because we have to make a hole in some sense . if weremove this element out then we have a hole here and then we have to push everything up to blockthis hole , because remember the array must have all elements contiguous that is without any gapsstarting from the initial position . the other way of storing a sequence , is to store it one element at atime and not bother about how these elements are with respect to each other in the memory . i canthink of this memory as a large space and now i might have one element here , so this is my firstelement and then i will have a way of saying that from here the next element is somewhere else , thisis what we call a link . so very often in the implementation these are called linked list , so i may havethe first element here . now because of various reasons i might end up putting the second elementhere and so on . you can imagine that if you have some say space in your cupboard and then you takeout things and then you put things back but you put things back in the first place where you have anempty slot , then the sequence in which you put thinks back may not respect the sequence in whichthey appear finally in the shelf . so , here in the same way we do not have any physical assumptionabout how these elements are stored , we just have a logical link from the first element to the nextelement and so on . the other part of this is that we do not have to worry about the overall length ofthe list because we know we started at the th position and we keep walking down . on the lastposition so say suppose the last position is in fact two then there would be some indication heresaying that there is no next element , so two is the last element . a list can have a flexible size andobviously because we are just pointing one element to another , we can also accommodate what wesee in python where each element of the list maybe of a different type and hence each value mighthave a different size in itself . it is not important unlike an array that all the values have exactly thesame size because we want to compute how many values to skip to get to the ith element . here , weare not skipping we are just walking down these links . since we have to follow these links the onlyway to find out where the ith element is is to start from the th element and then go to the firstelement then go to the second element and so on , because a priori we have no idea where the ithelement is . so , after i steps we will reach the ith element . and if we have a larger value of i it takeslonger to get there . so accessing the ith position in a sequence when the sequence is stored as a listtakes time proportional to i , we can not assume that we can reach any position in the list in constanttime unlike in an array . on the other hand it is relatively easy to either insert or delete an element ina list like this . supposing , we have a list like this . suppose , we start at th position and may come tothe ith position and currently if we say that the ith position points to the i plus th position whichpoint to the rest , and suppose we want to insert something here , then it is quite simple we just saythat this is the new i plus th position . we create a new block in memory to store this value and thenwe will make this point here . so , it is like plumbing , we remove one pipe and we attach a pipe fromthe ith element to the new element and attach another pipe to the new element to what wasbeyond the ith element previously . we just have to shift these three links around and this does notmatter wherever we have to do it , any place in the list if we have , i have just have to make this localchange in these links . and so this insertion becomes now a constant time operation if we already areat the position where we want to make the change . in the same way if we want to delete somethingthat is also easy in fact it is even easier . so , i have say i pointing to i plus pointing to i plus and iwant to remove this element , well then i just make this link directly point to the next one . rememberall these links are available to us we know this link we know this link , so we know where i plussecond element is . similarly here , when we want to create a new element we get a link for it becausewe create it and we know what link to copy there because we already have it here . so we can copy itfrom the ith element to the new element . therefore , in a list it is expensive to get to the ith elementit takes time proportional to the position we are trying to get to , however , having got to a positioninserting or deleting an element at that position is of constant time . unlike in an array , where if weinsert or delete at some position we have to shift a lot of values forwards or back words and thattakes time . let us look at typical operations that we perform on sequences . so one typical operation ,now if i just represent a sequence more abstractly as sequences we have been drawing it . supposing ,i want to exchange the values at i and j. this would take constant time in an array because we knowthat we can get the value at ith position , get the value at the jth position in constant timeindependent of i and j and then we exchange them it just involves coping this there and the otherone back . on the other hand in a list i have to first walk down to the ith position and then walk downto the jth position to get the two positions so i will have in a list i would have the sequence of linksand then i would have another sequence of links . then having now identified the block where the ithvalue is and the block where the jth values then i can of cause exchange them without actuallychanging the structure i just copy the values back and forth , but to find the ith and jth values it takestime proportional to i and j , so it takes linear time . on the other hand as we have already seen , if youwant to delete the value at position i or insert the value after position i this we can do efficiently in alist because we just have to shift some links around , whereas in an array we have to do some shiftingof a large bunch of values before or after the thing and that requires us to take time proportional to i .the consequence of these differences between the two representations of a sequence as an arrayand a list is that we have to be careful to think about how algorithms that we want to design forsequences apply depending on how the sequence is actually represented . an algorithm which worksefficiently for a list may or may not work efficiently for an array and vice versa . to illustrate this , let uslook at something which you are probably familiar with at least informally called binary search . theproblem we are interested in is to find out whether a value v is present in a collection or we can evencall it a sequence to be we more precise in a sequence which we call seq . so , we have a sequence ofvalues we want to check whether a given value is there or not . for instance , we might be looking atthe list of roll numbers of people who have been selected for a program you want to check whetherour roll number is there or not . there are two questions that we want to ask one is is it importantwhether the sequence is maintained as an array or as a list and is it also important given that it ismaintained as an array or a list whether or not there is some additional information we know forexample , it is useful for array to be sorted in ascending order that is all the elements go in strictly onesequence from beginning to end , lowest to highest , or highest to lowest , or does it matter , does itnot matter at all . here is a very simple python program to search for a value in a unsorted sequence .this is a similar to what we saw before where we are looking for the position of the first position of avalue in a sequence , which is we not we do not even need the position we only need true or false , isit there or is it not , it is a very simple thing . what we do is we loop through all the elements in thesequence and check whether any element is the value that we are looking for . once we have found itwe can exit , so this exits the function with the value true . and if we have succeeded in going throughthe entire list , but we have not exited with true that means we have not found the thing , so we canunambiguously say after the for that we have reached this point we have not found the value v thatwe are looking for and so we should return false . since we are not looking for the position we havemuch simpler code if you go back and see the code we wrote for findpos , so there we had first of allkeep track of the position and check the value at position i rather than the value itself . and secondly ,when we finish the loop we had to determine whether or not we had found it or we had not found it ,whether we had remember we use the break to get out of the loop for the first time we found it . weused to detect whether we broke or not , if we did not have a break then we had found it , if we didnot had a break we did not find it . accordingly either the value of pause was set or it was not set andif it is not set we should make it minus . so that was more complicated , this is very simple . the mainpoint of this function is that we have no solution to search other than to scan from beginning to end .the only systematic way to find out v occurs in the sequence or not is to start at the beginning andgo till the end and check every value , because we do not have any idea where this value might be .this will take time in general proportional to the length of the sequence . we are typically interestedin how long this function would take in the worst case . so what is the worst case ? well , of cause oneworst case is if we find the value at the end of the list . so , v is the last value then we have to look atall . but more generally v is not in the list . v is not in the list the only way we can determine the v isnot in the list is to check every value and determine that that value is not found . and this propertythat we have to scan the entire sequence and therefore we have to take time proportional to thesequence to determine whether v is in the sequence or not it does not matter if the sequence is anarray or a list , whether it is an array or a list we have to systematically go through every value theorganization of the information does not matter . what matters is the fact that there is no additionalstructure to the information , the information is not sorted in any way at no point can we give up andsay that since we have not seen it so far we are not going to see it later . on the other hand , if wehave a sorted sequence we have a procedure which would be at least informally familiar with you .when we search for a word in a dictionary for example , the dictionary is sorted by alphabetical orderof words . if we are looking for a word and if we open a page at random , supposing we are looking forthe word monkey and we open the dictionary at a page where the values or the word start with i ,then we know that m comes after i in the dictionary order of the english alphabet . so , we need toonly search in the second half of the dictionary after i , we do not have to look at any word before i. ingeneral if we have a sequence that efficient way to search for this value is to first look at the middlevalue , so we are looking for v , so we check what happens here . so , there are three cases either wehave found it in which ways which case we are good , if we have not found it we compare the valuewe are looking for with what we see over there . if the value we are looking for is smaller than thevalue we see over there , it must be in this half . on the other hand if the value we are looking for isbigger it must be in this half . so we can halve the amount of space to search and we can be sure thatthe half we are not going to look at positively does not have the value because we are assuming thatthis sequence is sorted . this is called binary search . this is also for example what you do when youplay game like twenty questions , if you play that when somebody ask you to guess the name of aperson they are thinking of then you might first ask the question whether the person is female , if theperson is female then the persons and their answer is yes then you only need to think about women ,if the person says no then you only need to think about m , so we have men . so , you have halfnumber of people in your imagination we have to think about . at each point each question thenfurther splits into two groups depending on whether the answer is yes or no . here is some pythoncode for binary search . so , binary search in general will start with the entire list and then as we said itlook at the midpoint and decide on the left , so we will have to again perform binary search on this .how would we do that ? again we will look at the midpoint of this part then we are again look at saythe midpoint of the next part that we look at and so on . in general binary search is trying to do abinary search for a value in some segment of the list . so we will demarcate that segment using l andr. so , we are looking for this slice sequence starting with l and going to r minus , we are assumingthat sequence is sorted and we are looking for v there . first of all if the slice is empty , so this says theslice is empty that is we have gone halving the thing and we have eventually run out of values to lookat . the last thing we look at was the slice of length and we divided it into and we got a select ofslice of length . then we can say that we have not found it yet , so we are not going to ever find itand we return false . on the other hand if the slice is not empty , then what we do is we first computethe midpoint . an easy way to compute the point is to use this integer division operation . supposing ,we are have currently the slice from to then at the next point we will take by integer wiseand we will go to . remember , , , . we could either choose or then next to split it into twoparts , because we are going to examine and then look at , and or look at and then , . if wedo integer division then we will pick the smaller output . so , we find the midpoint . now we checkwhether the value is the value at that midpoint if so we return true , if it is not then we checkwhether the smaller , if so we continue our search from the existing left point till the left of themidpoint . now we are using this python , think that this is actually means this is a slice up to mid andtherefore it stops at mid minus . so , it will not again look at the value we just examined . it will lookat everything strictly to its left . if the value that we are looking for is not the value with the midpointand it is smaller than the midpoint , look to the left , otherwise you look strictly to the right , you startat mid plus one and go up to the current right line . this is a recursive function . it will keep doing thisat each point the interval will half , so eventually supposing we have a slice of the form just one value ,so to for example , then at the next point right we will end up having to look at just a slice fromto or to and this will give us a slice which is empty because we will find at the right point at theleft point are the same . so , how long does the binary search algorithm take ? the key point is thateach step halves the interval that we are searching and if we have an empty interval we get animmediate answer . so , the usual way we do this is to record the time taken depending on the size ofthe sequence or the array or the list , so we have written array here , but it would be sequence ingeneral . if the sequence has length then it takes only one step because we just report that it is falsewe can not find it if there are no elements left . otherwise , we have to examine the midpoint , so thattakes one abstract step you know computing the midpoint and checking whether the value is we willcollapse at all into one abstract step . and then depending on the answer , remember we arecomputing worst case the answer in the worst case is when it is going to be found in the sequence .so , the worst case it will not be the midpoint we will have to look at half the sequence . we will haveto again solve a binary search for a new list which is half the length of the old list , so the time takenfor n elements is plus the time taken for n by elements . we want an expression for t of n whichsatisfies , so this is what is called a recurrence normally . what function t of n would satisfy this ? oneway to do that is just keep substituting and see what happens . we start unwinding as itself , so , wehave this by the same recurrence should be plus t of n by , because i take this and halve it . so , tof n is plus plus t of n by . so , we start with plus t of n by and i expand this . then i get plusplus t of n by squared and in this case i will again get plus plus by t of n by cube . ingeneral after k steps we will have plus plus k plus times or k times and t of n by to the k .now when do we stop ? we stop when we actually get t of or we can also say that for t of it takesone step just we want to be careful . so , when this expression becomes so when n is equal to tothe k. so , when is n equal to to the k , this is precisely the definition of log right . how many times doi have to multiply by itself , in order to get n and that is the value of k that we want . after log n stepsthis term will turn out to be . we will end up with roughly log n times added up and so we will getlog n steps . so what we are saying is really , if we start with the values , in the next step we willend up searching , next step , next step , next step and so on . and if we keep doing thiswhen will we get to a trivial sequence of length or . well , be keep dividing by how manytimes can we divide by that is precisely the log of to the base and that is an equivalentdefinition of log . this comes back to another point . now we have said that if we had a sortedsequence of values we can do this clever binary search , but remember that it requires as to jump inand compute mid which is fine and we need to then look at the value at the midpoint and we areassuming that this computation of mid and comparing the value of the midpoint to constant amountof time , that is why we said that it is plus t n by this involves computing mid and looking up thefrequency at the midpoint . but this can only be done for arrays because only for arrays can we take aposition and jump in and get the value at that position in constant time , it will not work for lists ,because we need to look up the sequence at the ith position in constant time . of course , oneimportant and probably not so obvious thing if you think about binary search is that by only lookingat a very small number of values , say for example we give you a sorted list of entries as i said ifa value is not there we only have to search possible entries , because we keep having after log nwhich is about to remember the to the is right two times , two times , two ten times is. after halvings of we would have come down to or . we would definitely be able totell quickly whether it is there or not . so , we only look at values out of , values we do notlook at all unlike the unsorted case where we have to look at every possible value before we solve . itis very efficient binary search , but it requires us to be able to jump into the ith position in constanttime therefore if i actually did a binary search on a list even if it is sorted and not on an array where ihave to start at the th position and walk to the ith position by following links unfortunately binarysearch will not give me the expected bonus that i get when i use an array . so having discussed thisabstractly , we are of course working in the context of pythons . the question is , are built in lists inpython are they lists as we have talked about them or are they arrays . actually , the documentationwould suggest if you look at the python documentation that they are lists because you do have theseexpansion and contraction functions so we saw we can do an append or we can do a remove of avalue and so on . they do support these flexible things which are typical of lists , however pythonsupports this indexed position right so it allows us to look for a to the i. if you try it out on a large listyou will find that it actually does not take that much more time to go say it construct a list of ahundred thousand elements , you will find it takes no more time to go to the last position as to thefirst position as you would normally expect in a list we said that it should take longer to go to the lastposition . although they are lists as far as we are concerned we will treat them as arrays when wewant to , and just to emphasise how lists work when we go further in this course we will actually lookat how to implement some data structures . and we will see how to explicitly implement a list withthese pointers which point from one element to another . for the rest of this course whenever welook at a python list we will kind of implicitly use it as an array , so when we discuss further sortingalgorithms and all that we will do the analysis for the algorithms assuming they are arrays , we willget give python implementation using python 's built in list , but as far as we are concerned these listsare equivalent to arrays for the purpose of this course . let us revisit loops . so , we saw that we havetwo types of loops in python . the first is a 'for loop ' where the value ranges over a list in general orsay the output of the range sequence so for i in l will repeat the body for each item in the list l .sometimes we do not know how many times we need to repeat in advance , so then we use thewhile forms . while takes a condition and it keeps repeating the body until the condition becomesfalse . but the main thing to notice in both these cases is that how long will the loop takes isdetermined in advance either we have a fixed number of iterations depending on number of valuesin l for a for loop or we keep going until the condition becomes false we can not stop before that .now it does turn out the sometimes we have natural situations where we want to cut short the loopand not proceed till the very end . suppose , we want to write a function findpos which finds the firstposition of a value v in the list . we had seen that there is a built in function called index whichpretty much does this , so l dot index v will report the first position where v occurs in the list l .however , the index function will report an error if there is no occurrence of v in l. so , we want tochange that slightly and what we want to say is that if there is no v in l report minus . so either weget a value between to n minus , where n is the length of the list or we get the value minussaying that v is not in the list . here is a while loop implementation . we use a name found as thename suggest to indicate whether the value have been found or not as we have been seeing so far .initially we have not seen any values in l , so v is , the found is false . and we use i as a name to gothrough the positions , so i is initially and we will increment i until we hit the length of l. so , so longas , while i is less than the length of the l , if we see the value we are looking for then we update foundto be true and we mark the position that we have found it to be pos . at the end of this , if we havenot found the value , so the value found is not been set to true that means there was no v in the listthen we will set pos to minus which is the default value we indicate at beginning . then we returnthe current value of pos which is either the value of pos we found or the value will set to minusbecause we did not find it . there are two points to observe about this the first point which is themain issue at hand is that we are going to necessarily go through every position i from to the lengthof l minus regardless of where we find it . supposing , we had several hundreds of thousands ofelements in our list and we found the value at the very second position we are still going to scan theremaining hundreds of thousands of positions before we return the position two . now this seemsvery unnecessary . the other point , which is an issue of correctness , this is an issue of efficiency thatwe are running this loop too many times unnecessarily . in case we are actually able to report the firstvalue quite early . the other problem which is correctness is that we want to report the first position ,but the way we have written it every time we continue pass the first position and we find anothercopy of v we are updating the position to be the new thing . so , we are actually finding not the firstposition but the last position so this is not a very good way to do this . so , we first change that . so wesay that we want the first position . so , we want the first position we want this update to happen onlyif we have not found the value so far we had this extra condition which says that if l i is v and wehave not founded so far then we update found to true and we said pos to i. this ensures that pos isupdated to i only the very first time we see v after that the value found prevents us from doing thisupdate again . so , at least we are correctly finding the first value of the position . and finally as beforeif we never find it then the value found is never set to true and so we report minus . now the issueis why we have to wastefully go through the entire list even though after we find the very firstposition of v in l we can safely return and report that position . so , a more natural strategy suggeststhe following we scan the list and we stop the scan as soon as we find the value . so , whenever wefind the value for the first time we report that position and we get out . of course , the scan may notfind the value , so if the scan completes without succeeding then we will report minus . we couldthink of doing this using a 'for loop ' . so , we go through every value in l using a variable x. so , x is thename which goes through the first element , second element , these are not positions now these arethe actual values . we check whether the value x that we currently pick up in the list is indeed thevalue v we are looking for , if so we exit and we report the position of this x. if we come to the end ofthe loop and we have not seen x so far like before we want to report minus . here is a first attemptat doing it , so let us go through it systematically . first of all we have this loop , so for each x in the listif x is v then we report the position . now we have to find the position because we are going throughthe values so this has forced us to use a name i to record the position and we have to manually dothis . so , like in the while loop we start with the position and then every iteration we increment theposition . this is only the first version of this we will see how to fix this . so , we have to separatelykeep track while we are doing this for , kept , separately keep track of the positions and report it . butwhat is new and this is a main issue to be highlighted here is this statement called break . so whatbreak does is it exits the loop . so this is precisely what we wanted to do if x is v we have found thefirst position we do not want to continue we just want to break , if not we will go increment theposition and go back . now , how do we record at the end we do not have this found variableanymore . how do we know at the end whether or not we actually saw it ? so , the question is was posset to i or was it not set to i. well , the default value is minus . supposing , pos is not reset we want toreport minus . so , this is why in our function we have actually initially set pos to be minus . so , thedefault value is that we do not expect to find . it is like saying found is false . so , by default theposition is minus . at the end of this loop if you have not found it pos has not been reset so itremains minus . on the other hand if we have found it without looking at all the remainingelements we have set it to the first position we found it and we have taken a break statement to getout of the loop so we do not unnecessarily scan . when we come here either way we have eitherreport it to first position we have found it or in the worst case we have scanned through the entirelist , and we have not found it in which case the initial value minus is there . so , in any case we canreturn pos and we have no problem this is just to illustrate the use of the word break , which allowsus in certain situations to get out . now remember in the worst case we do not find x in it . so , theworst case behavior of this loop is no different from the situation without the break we have to gothrough the entire list and we have to come out only when we have scanned everything , but if we dofind it we can avoid some unnecessary computations . we can simplify this a little bit by firstremoving this i instead of scanning x actually it is better to scan the positions . so , it is better to saypos is minus , but instead of going through x in l it is better to go through i in the range .remember now this is implicitly to the length of l minus . so , we go for i in the range to length ofl , so if we do not give a it will give only a one argument this is taken as the upper bound . this willgo through all the positions . and instead of checking x we check l at position i , so if l a position i is vthen we set the position to this current value and we break . so , by changing the variable that we putin the 'for ' , we have got a slightly more natural function . and again , we have this clever trick whichsays that since we set pos initially to minus if we did not reset it here if no value in the range to nminus produced a list value which is equal to the value we are looking for we will return minus asbefore . this requires this clever trick . so the question is what if we do not have a situation wheresuch a clever trick is possible or if we do not think of this clever trick how would we know at thispoint . so remember now there are two situations either we break , so if we break that means thatthe value is found , or if we do not break , if we terminate normally , if the loop ends by going throughall the things then v is not found . remember even if v is found at very last position we will first break ,we will not go back and say that the loop ended . so , if we see v at any position from beginning to endwe will execute the break statement if not we will not . the question is can we detect whether or notwe broke out this loop or whether we terminate it separately . python is one of the few languageswhich actually provide way to do this . so it allows something that looks a bit odd because of thename it allows something called else which we saw with if , it allows an else for a loop as well . theidea is that else this part will be executed if there is no break if the loop terminated normally , so donot worry about the fact that else does not mean this in english so it is just a way of economizing orthe number of new words you need to use . if you see an else attached to a 'for ' it could also beattach to a 'while ' it means that the 'while ' or the 'for ' terminated in the natural way either foriterated through every value that it was supposed to iterate through or the while condition becamefalse . on the other hand aborted by a break statement then the else will not be executed . here forinstance , now we do not initialize . we no longer have this clever trick , we do not have this anymore .so what we say is that for i this range we check and if it is there we set the position to be the currenti and then we break . now , if we have actually gone through the entire list and not found it pos isundefined . if pos is undefined we need to define it before we return the value , so we have this elsestatement . now we say , we have come through this is whole thing and there will be no break , thereis no v in l because otherwise we would have done a break and otherwise pos will be set to a validvalue in the range to n minus . so , there has been no break there is no v in l. let us say pos tominus and then return it . to summarize , it is very often useful to be able to break out of a loopprematurely . we can do this for both for and while we can execute the break statement and get outof a loop before its natural termination . and sometimes it is important to know why we terminate it ,we terminate it because the loop ended naturally or because we used the break statement . this canbe done by supplying the optional else . both , for and while also allow an else at the end , and thestatement within else is executed only when loop terminates normally . so lets take a closer look atlists now . we said that lists are mutable objects . so , if we have a list called list whose values are ,, , , and then we assigned list to the list named list then we said both list and list in this casebecause lists are mutable will be pointing to the same list , , , . now if i take the positionwhich is this position and replace it by the value then clearly list is , , , , but because listand list were pointing to the same object we have that list also has the same value , , , . onthe other hand , if we made this change in a more roundabout way . so what we did was , we took thislist and then we first took its slice , from up to position not so i get , . then i insert a , andthen i take from position on wards which is . then i also get , , , in list . but on the otherhand because i used plus , what i have done is i have created a new list and therefore list has notchanged , in this case list remains , , , in other words , concatenation using plus results inproducing a new list . let us check this in the python interpreter . so , if i say list in to , , , forexample , and i say list is equal to list and then i just change the position of list then list andlist are , , , . on the other hand if i say list is equal to , , , as before and list is equal tolist and now i change list in this slice plus concatenation way , so if i say take the first two positionsthen put a and then take the rest of list . now , list is again , , , , but list which was pointingto list is no longer pointing to list because the plus has created a new list and so the new list is notthe same as your old list , so list continues to point at the old list so it is , , , . this is animportant point that one has to keep in mind regarding mutability . if we start reassigning a list usingplus we get a new list , this also applies when we do it inside a function . if inside a function we wantto update a function list then so long as we do not reassign it we are ok , but if we put areassignment using plus then the list that has been updated inside the function will not reflectoutside the function . so , we always have to be very careful about this . now , how would be go aboutextending a list ? suppose , we want to stick a new value at the end of a list one way to do this isto say l is l plus . but as we saw , this plus operator will create a new list , so if you wanted toappend a value to a list and maintain the same list so that for instance if it is inside the function wedo not lose the connection between the argument and the value will being manipulated inside thefunction this would not do . we saw this function append in passing when we did gcd in the very firstweek . append is a function which will take a list and add a value to it . so here we have said list is ,, , as in the previous examples . list is list and now we have said take list and append . so ,list the way we have write it is list dot append and in append we give the argument the new valueto be appended . so what this does is , of course it will make list now a five element list with theoriginal , , , and a new value at the end , but importantly this is the old list it is not a new listin that sense . so , list has also changed . append actually adds a value in place both list and listpoint to be new list with at the end . on the other hand , if we had done it like i mentioned usingthe plus operator then we would find that list changes , but list does not because as we saw beforeconcatenation produces a new list . so , append is a function which extends a list with a new valuewithout changing it . so , append takes a single value . now , what if we wanted to append not a singlevalue , but a list of values we wanted to actually take a list and expand it by adding a list at the end ,we had say , , and we wanted to put , , . so , we want to take , , and we wanted toexpand this to have three more values , of course we can append each of these value one at a time .but there is a function which is provided which like append extends a list , but here this must be a listitself . so extend takes a list as an argument , append takes a value as an argument . so , list extendlist is the equivalent of saying list is equal to list plus list , but remember that this must be a list itis not a single value it is not a sequence of value it is a list so it is must be given in square bracketsyou must give , , as an argument to the extend function . now , this is to add elements to a listthere is also a way to remove an element from a list . so , this is one way to remove it by specifyingthe value . we are not looking at a particular position we are looking for a value x and list removesthe first occurrence of x in the list . now , you may ask what happens if there is no occurrence x in thelist . well , in fact this will give us an error so you have to be careful to use remove only if you knowthat there is at least one copy of x and remember it only removes the very first occurrence , doesnotremove all the occurrences . so , if there are ten occurrences of x in list only the very first one will beremoved . let us explore these things . let us start say with list , so remember from the previouslecture we said we can take range and produce a list . now if i do this i have list is , , to , now ifi say list dot append , then list is appended with . now if i say list dot extend say , , thenlist now has , appearing . so this is how append and extend work . now supposing , just for thesake of argument i take list and i make two copies of list . now , list goes from to with a gap ofcourse in between at and , again from to . now if i say list dot remove say , now thereare two copies of remember the first copy which is here in the beginning and second copy which islater , so this will remove the first copy . now , if i look at list the first one skip at to , but thesecond copy is still there . if i say it again then both copies have gone , because i do not have this ,and i also do not have a here again its , . now what happens if i have remove it a third time , nowi get an error saying x is not in the list . remember that remove works only if x is in the list , if it is notin the list you get an error . now it is important we will see later that we get an error it also has aname , so it says a value error . this will be useful because later on we will find that within python wecan actually examine errors and take alternative action if an error occurs and we can signal what typeof error it is by looking at the value that the error returns . the append function looks a little bitdifferent from the other functions we have seen so far . we would normally expect the functionappend to take two arguments the list and the value to be appended . so we would think that thecorrect way or the natural way to write append would be to say append to list the value x. on theother hand what we have is this funny notation it takes says to list apply the function append withvalue x. in a python terminology list is an object and append is a function to update the object and xis supposed to be an argument to the function append . in such a situation we have an object and wethen apply a function to it , so we use three functions attached to the object by using the dotnotation rather than passing the object to the function which is a more normal way in which youthink of functions . we will come back to this point later on and may be two three weeks from nowand we look at what is called object oriented programming within python . there is another way toexpand and contract lists and place , this is by directly assigning new values to a slice . so , we go backto our old example list is , , , and list is list . now what we are saying is that take the slicefrom position on wards and assign it the value , . so remember the positions are , , , . sowhat this is saying is , take this slice namely , and replace it by , . what we get is that , of courselist is the slice , is replaced by , , but this slice replacement happens in place . it is a bit likeassigning a new value at a given position . if i say list is equal to we said that position twobecomes . in the same way if i say that list from slice two to the end become , it changes , to, both in list , but it also does not change where it is pointing to , so list also get affected . so bothof them now say , , , . now , here we had a slice of length two and we replaced it by a new list oflength two . so , we preserved the structure of the list in terms of the number of positions . this is notrequired , python allows you to both expand and shrink a slice . for instance , you could have takenthat list , now let us say we have this is , , , and again we want to take slice onwards which hastwo positions and we can say replace it by a list with three values . we are saying take this list takethe slice from to , the last two positions and replace it with three values and what we get is theold , and this slice has now become , , . so , we had a four element list become a fiveelement list . this is the one way to expand a list in place using a slice . the other thing we can do isshrink a list we can put a smaller thing . supposing , we want the list to have just one value in theposition on , so we take the slice to which will give us these two positions so now you have aslice of length two , but we assign it a list of length one . so , this , is replaced by just the single .now we had a list of length five after the previous expansions which has now become a list of lengthfour after this contraction . with slices you can replace a slice in place , this can produce a bigger listor a smaller list depending on what you put in , but as you can imagine this can be very confusing . so ,you should be very careful that you know what you are doing if you are trying to directly updatesslices in the list . one of the very common things that we want to know about a list is whether a valueexists in a list . so , python has a very simple expression called x in l. so , x in l returns true if the value xis found in the list l. now we can use this for instance to make our remove a safe operation beforewe invoke l dot remove x we first check that x actually is in l. so , if x is in l then the condition will betrue and only then will we try to remove it , if x is not in l then we would not remove x. in this case weare guaranteed that l dot remove will not be called in an error prone context where it will say there isno x in l. also recall that remove removes only the first element . we can replace this if by a while andsay that so long as there is a value x in l keep applying remove . this will in one short remove all thex s in l because every time we remove an x we go back and check if there is still an x in l if there arestill on x in l we remove it , so from left to right this loop will remove all the x s in l. now there are ahost of other functions defined for list , for instance l dot reverse will reverse a list in place , l dot sortwill sort a list in ascending order . you can also sort it in other orders you can look up and see how todo that . if we only want to know whether an element is in l we say x in l , but if we want to knowwhere it occurs then we use index it will find the leftmost position , but again it will give us an error ifthere is no x in the list , so we should first check if x in l and then find the index of the leftmostposition . now you might want not the leftmost or the rightmost position so there is an r index andthere is a host of other functions and you must look up the python documentation there is no waythat this course or any course can cover every function which is defined in python for every type . soyou do have to look up the documentation and if you think that there should be a function thatwhich does something natural very often there will be . so , try and look it up and see for yourself howit works and try to use it . if you have a question like what happens if i do this well python is aninteractive language . what happens if i do this ? just try it out and see and try to figure out fromwhat you see in the interpreter , how the function works , in case there seems to be some ambiguityin the documentation . but above all do not be afraid to see in documentation only by looking up adocumentation will you be able to learn the functions that you need because it is very difficult as isaid to say up front every possible function that is there . final point regarding list is something wetalked about in passing , which is that since names do not have types in python , we do not have toannounce the name , names just pop up as the code progresses . so every time a name pops uspython needs to know what value it is . typically the first time we use a name we have to put it aspart of an assignment , we have to assign a value to it and that value has to be something which iscomputable given the current names . so if we want to assign for instance to the name y theexpression x plus , at this point implicitly x must have a value , otherwise the x plus can not beevaluated . so , if x has not been seen before and for the first time in my code i see it on the righthand side of an assignment it means that i am expected to produce a value for x but no value hasbeen assigned so far and this will give you an error . this is quite easy to spot , so when you writesomething and you see something on the right hand side and you have not seen it before then itmeans a python will flag an error and it is not very difficult to understand why this is so . now thekind of list functions we saw now , it is bit more subtle . when i say l dot append v there is no equal tosign . so it is not immediately obvious that l dot append v requires l to already be having a list value ,why can not i just append v for example to an empty list . well , of course i can append v to an emptylist how does python know that l is in empty list . so , python needs to know that l is a list , before itcan apply this append function . so , we saw this small function earlier which computes factors of n .so essentially what it does is , it takes all numbers in the range to n. i take to n plus so that i runthrough the sequence to n. and if a number divides n evenly if there is no remainder i have usedthe append function now to append i to the list of factors which i will return . now , the catch with thisis that when i come for first time to this statement the first factor which will be of course becausewill have always be a factor . python will have to ask why flist has the ability to append a value ,because flist has never been encountered to this point . we were careful when we wrote the code , ofcourse we used plus because we did not use append in that code but it is the same thing . we have tobe careful to insert this initialization . this initialization is only needed to tell python when this firstappend happens that it is indeed the case that flist is of type list and therefore the append function isa valid function to apply to this name , without this you will get an error . just remember that youalways have to make sure that every name that you use is initialized to a value the first time , so thatwhenever it appears later on , the value is clear and therefore what operations are allowed for thisname are also clear to python . to summarize , what we saw is that we can extend lists in place usingfunctions like append , extend and so on . we can also assign a new value in place to a slice of a listand in the process expand or contract the list , but this is something to be done with care you mustmake sure you know what you are doing . there are several built in functions on list we will see someof them as we go along and use them and describe them as we see them , but it is impossible todocument all of them and to go through all of them and it is also a very boring to just list out of abunch of functions . so , do look up the tutorial and other documentation which is available which imentioned in the earlier weeks , so that you can find out what kind of functions are available . andfinally , do not forget that you must assign a value to a name before it is first used otherwise , becausenames do not themselves have types , python will not know what to do with the given name . wehave seen the range function which produces a sequence of values . in general , if we write range icomma j , we get the sequence i , i plus up to j minus . quite often we want to start with . so , ifwe will give only one argument if we just write range j , this is seen as the upper bound and the lowerbound is . this is like a slice , where if you do not write the first argument of the slice , if we write forinstance l colon n then it will run from to n minus . in the same way if we just write range j ,automatically we will get , up to j minus . often we may want to generate a sequence where weskip by a value other than . we want a kind of arithmetic progression if you are familiar with that .so , we want i , i plus k , i plus k and so on , we do this by giving a third argument . the third argumentif we give it to range tells the range function to skip every k item . so , we have i then we go directly toi plus k. so , implicitly if we do not say anything it is like we put a here right . so , the default value isi , i plus and so on . now , how far does this go ? well , we want to go until we reach normally jminus . in general , we do not want to cross j. so , what we will do is we will get i plus n k for thelargest n such that i plus n k is smaller than j , but if i go one more step , if i go to i plus n plus times kthen i will cross j right . so , if we have a step then we will keep going until we cross j and we will stopat the last value that is before j. having a step also allows us to count down . all we have to do ismake the step negative . so , if we say i comma j comma minus then provided we start with thevalue which is bigger than the final value , we will start with i produce , i minus , i minus and so onand we will stop with j plus . the general rule for the range function is that you start with i and youincrement or decrement if k is negative , in steps of k such that you keep going as far as possiblewithout crossing j. in particular , what this means is that if you are going forward , if you are crossing ,if you have positive , if your increment is positive then if you start with the value which is too largethen you will generate the empty sequence because you can not even generate i because i itself isbigger than j or equal to j then that would not be allowed . conversely in the negative direction whathappens is that if we start with the value which is smaller than the target value , we are alreadybelow j and so we can not proceed , we get an empty sequence . this idea about not crossing j it is notsame as saying stops smaller than j because if you are going in the negative direction you want tostop at a value larger than j. so , you can think of it as before and before means different thingsdepending on whether you are going forwards or backwards . just to see an example , suppose wewant to have a range which starts from and whose limit is , but the increment is minus . so , wewill start with and then we will go to , then we will go to , then we will go to and if we were togo one more step you would go to , but since crosses in the negative direction we would stop atitself , we would not cross over to . it is often confusing to new programmers that range i comma jis actually from i to j minus and not to j itself . so , there is no real reason why it should be this way ,it is just a convenience and the main convenience is that this makes it easier to process lists .remember that if we have a list of length n , the positions in the list are numbered , up to n minus. so , very often what we want to do is range over the indices from to n minus and if we do notknow n in advance , we get it using the length function . we would like to range from to the lengthof the list . if the range is defined as it is now , where the actual value stops one less than the upperlimit then range comma length of l will produce the current range of valid indices . if on the otherhand it did , what we would perhaps think is more natural and it will do i , i plus up to j , if this werethe case then every time when we wanted to actually range over the list positions , we would have togo from to length of l minus . so , we have to awkwardly say minus every time just to remindourselves that the position stops one short . it mainly for this convenience that we can freely use thelength of the list as the upper bound that the list stops , that the range stops at j minus . as i saidthis is not , i mean , required you could easily define a range function which does the natural thingwhich is i , i plus up to j , but then you have to keep remembering to put a minus whenever youwant the indices to stop with the correct place . a range is a sequence and it is tempting to think ofrange as a list . we saw that for comes in flavors , we can either say for i in a list or we can say for i inrange something . so , range to generates a sequence , up to . so , is this the same as sayingfor i in the list , , , , up to . in other words , if we ask python the following comparison , is rangecomma equal to the list , , , up to then the question is the result of this comparison trueor false . here , we encounter a difference between python and python . in python , the output ofrange is in fact , the list . so , if you run this equality check , in python the answer would be true , butfor us in python range is not a list . so , range produces something which is a sequence of valueswhich can be used in context like a 'for ' , but technically the range is not a list , we can not manipulatethe output of range the way we manipulate the list . now , it is possible to use range to generate a listusing the function list . so , name of the function is actually list . what we do , for example , is give therange as an argument of list . so , the sequence produced by a range will be converted to a list . if iwant the list to , i can say give me the range up to . remember , the range was stopped atbecause is the upper bound and this sequence will be converted to a list by the function list . this isan example of a type conversion we are converting the sequence generated by a range , if we said isnot a list into a list by saying , make it a list . so , the function list takes something and makes it a list ifit is possible to make it a list . if it is something which does not make sense it will not give you a validvalue , now this is a general feature . so , we can use the names that python internally uses for typesalso as functions to convert one type to another , for example , if we have the number and we wantto think of it as a string then the function str will take its argument and convert it to a string . so , strwill take any value and convert it to a string representing that value . this happens implicitly forinstance as we will see when we want to display a value using a print function . so , what print will dois take a value , convert it to a string and only strings can actually be displayed , because strings aretexts what we see on the screen or when we print out something is text . so , str is implicitly used veryoften . sometimes we want to do the reverse we want to take a string and convert it to a value . so ,for instance if the string consists only of digits then we should get a value corresponding to thatstring . if we give it the string then it should give us back the integer . so , the value ,remember the name of the function is the same as the name of the type to which you want theconversion to be done . so , we want to take a string and make it into an int , we use the name int .now , in all these things the function will not produce a valid value if it can not do so . if i give thefunction int a string which does not represent the number then it will just give me an error . so , longas a type conversion is possible it will do it , if it does not it returns an error . we will see later on thatactually the fact that you get an error is not a disaster there are ways within python to recover froman error or to check what error it is and proceed accordingly . to summarize what we have seen isthat our simple notion of range from i to j has some variants . in particular , if we do not give it astarting point we just give it one value it is interpreted as an upper bound . so , range n is a short wayof writing , , up to n minus . also we can use the third argument which is a step in order toproduce sequences which proceed in steps i , i plus k , i plus k and so on . in particular , if k is anegative step then we can produce decreasing sequences , and the last thing to remember is thoughrange produces a sequence which can be used exactly like a list in things like for , in python a rangeis not a list . if we want to get a list from a range output we must use this type conversion called list .in general , we can use type names to convert from one type to another type , provided the value weare converting is compatible with the type we are trying to convert to . we have already seen afunction which computes the factors of a number n. so , we observed that all the factors must liebetween and n. this is something we can naturally compute using a for loop . we define factors of nas follows we assume that the list of factors is empty , and for each number in the range to n if thatnumber is a divisor , is a factor of n we append it to the list of factors and eventually we return thislist . this is a simple function which just takes the list of factors gives back the list of factors of theinput n. a prime number is one which is divisible by no other number other rather than and itself .in other words , the only factors of n should be and n , if n is a prime . so , for example , which is aprime number has only two factors and . whereas , which is not a prime have many morefactors , it is also times and times . so the list of factors of is a longer list and just comma. this allows us to write a very simple definition of prime based on factors which we have alreadyseen . number is prime , if the list of factors is exactly comma n. so what we do is we invoke thefunction factors and check what it returns and see if it is equal to the list comma n. this is anotherillustration of the fact that if we break up our code into functions then we can use functions oneinside the other , and break up our problem into smaller units which are easier to digest and tounderstand . here , we said that a prime number has only two factors and itself . we have separatelywritten a way to compute the list of factors , so we can take that list and directly check whether ornot a given number is prime . one small thing to be aware of when we are dealing with primenumbers is that we should not accidentally define to be a prime , because if you just look at thisdefinition that the only factors are and itself , it is a bit ambiguous because is a factor and itselfis also a factor . we could naively read this as saying that is a prime , but by convention is not aprime . so , there should be two factors separately and itself . fortunately we call our function factorsthen factors of will return as single list containing singleton list containing the value , because itwill run from the code will run from to , so it will only find it once . whereas , in order for thisreturn statement to be true , i would like the actual value to be comma , comma n , so n is . sofortunately , the way we have written isprime , it will correctly report that is not a prime , but theseare the kind of boundary conditions that one must be careful to check when one is writing functionsin python or any other programming language . what if you want to list all the prime numbers whichlie below a given number n. so , we have to just check for every number from to n , whether or notit is a prime . we already know how to check if something is a prime . once again , we can write afunction primesupto which takes an argument n. so , initially we say that there are no primes up to n .now for all numbers in the range to n plus , which means from , up to n. we check if thatnumber i is a prime , now this is a function we have already written . if it is a prime then we append itour list , if not we go to the next one and finally we return the list of primes we have seen . onceagain , now we have use a function we have written before isprime . isprime in turn uses the functioncalled factors which we do not see here . we have three levels of functions now , primesupto whichcalls isprime , which calls factors . this is a very typical way you write nice programs where you breakup your work into small functions . now the other advantage of breaking up your work into smallfunctions is that if you want to optimize or make something more efficient , you might first write mostobvious or naive way to implement a function so that you can check that your overall code doeswhat it supposed to do then you can separately go into each function and then update or optimize itto make more efficient . so , breaking up your code into functions makes it easier to update your codeand to maintain it , and change parts of it without affecting the rest . primes up to n , we knew inadvance that we have to check all the numbers from to n , so we could use for . what if we changeour requirements saying that we do not want primes up to n , but we want the first n primes . now , ifwe want the first n primes , we do not know how many numbers to scan . we do not know where then th prime will come . if n is small , we might be able to figure out just by looking at it , but if n is large ,if we ask the first thousand primes it is very difficult to estimate how big the thousandth of prime willbe . so , we have to keep going until we find thousand primes and we do not know in advance . this isa good case for using the other type of loop namely while . so , what we need to do is we need tokeep a count of how many primes we have seen . we need to go through all the numbers one at atime to check if they are primes , and we need a list of all the primes we have seen so far . just toillustrate another point that we have seen this is a simultaneous assignment which says okay , initiallywe have seen prime , so count is . we start with the number , this is the first number we checkwhether it is a prime or not , and initially the list of primes is empty . so this says , take these threevalues , take three these names and assign them these three values . assign this is same , same ascount is equal to i is equal to and plist is empty . so , this has the same effect this particularassignment . now so long as we have not seen n primes , while count is less than n , we have to checkwhether the current i is a prime and if so , add it . if the first , if the value i we are looking at is a primethen first of all we have found one more prime , so we increment the value of count . and we havefound a prime , so we must add it to the list of primes . if this is not a prime , we must go to the nextnumber in any case , we must go to the next number and until we hit a count of n. so , we outside if ,so this is unconditional we always update . so , for each i we first check if it is a prime , if it is a primewe update count and we append i to plist . and whether or not it is a prime , we increment i and eachtime , we increment count we are making progress towards this while terminating . remember that itis our job to make sure that this while will eventually get out this condition will become false . everytime we see a prime count is going to become count plus . we start with count equal to , soeventually it is going to cross n. of course , we are using fact the implicit fact we know that there arean infinite number of primes . we were always for any n , we able to find the first n primes . so , whenwe do find n primes , when we have gone from to n minus , and we have reach the count n , wehave seen n primes then we return the list that we found so far and this is plist . these two examples ,the primes up to n and n primes illustrate the difference between the uses of for and while . in primesup to n , we know that we must scan all the numbers from to n , so it is easy to use the 'for ' . innprimes , we do not know how many primes , how many numbers we have to scan to find nprimes , sowe use a while and we keep count and we wait for the count to cross the number that we are lookingfor . so , it turns out that you do not actually need a 'for ' , you can always simulate a 'for ' by a while . letus look at the two typical ways in which we write for . the first way is this for in a range , so we say forn in the range i to j. we start at i and we let n go through the sequence i , i plus up to j minus andfor each value of n , we execute this statement or there might be more statements here . this is ablock of things inside the loop that we will execute . if you want to do this without for , we could do itwith a while as follows . so we initialize , so says with the first value of n is i and so long as n does notcross j , you execute this statement the exact same statement , and you increment n. so , it comesback here and you check now you get i plus , i plus , and then when you reach j minus then nexttime it will be j and it will exit . we have a range in the 'for ' , we can just setup a counter and manuallyincrement the counter and check the counter value against the upper bound in the while . the otherway that we use for is to iterate through the elements of a list . so , n now if a l is a list of values x , xup to xk , n will take each value in this list . here , we can now setup positions to walk through the listand pickup the value at each position . we say we start at the th position and so long as we havenot reach the end of the list in terms of positions , we set n to be the value at position i then weexecute this statement and we increment position . so , both forms of the 'for ' can be written aswhile , but notice that the right hand side is significantly more ugly and complicated than the lefthand side . while we can use this , the while statement to simulate the 'for statement ' it is much nicerto use the 'for ' , where it is natural where we know in advance what exactly we are repeating over .this makes for more readable code . and in general , more readable code makes for a better program .so , what do you need to do to write a good program ? well first of all it must do what you expect it todo , so it must be correct . and secondly , it must do it in as efficient a way as possible we are notlooked at efficiency so far , we will look at it as we get further in the course . but we want to do thingsquickly we want to do things the most with the efficient manner and this is where the algorithmcomes in , how you do something is what the algorithm will tell you . and the second part is that youmust write down your instructions in a way that as easy for you to validated as being correct , and forsomebody else to understand and if necessary update . now we should not under emphasize this factof maintenance you write something today , which serves the certain function very often somebodywill have to later on either make it more efficient or change the functionality increase the range ofthings your program does and in that case very often , it is not the person who writes the codes butsomebody else who have the job of understanding and updating the code . so , at every stage if theperson who is making modification starting from the person , who wrote the code initially writes it ina clear and readable style it makes it much easier to maintain the code in a robust manner as itevolves . to summarize , there are two parts of programming first is what you want to say which thealgorithm is , in the second part is how you say which is the style . so , every programming languagehas a style use the style to make for the most effective and readable code you can find if you have a'for ' use it , do not force as i said to use a while and so on . we have seen how to alter the flow of aprogram by using if , for and while . we can have conditional execution , we can have repeatedexecution . the last ingredient in our typical python program is a function . what is a function ? afunction is a group of statements which performs a given task . so of course , we could write thefunction code as part of the main program , but by isolating it we can logically separate out units ofwork and very often these functions are called repeatedly with different arguments . so , theyconstitute a unit of computation which can be used repeatedly from time to time . we definefunctions using the def statement as we have seen informally . so the definition defines the name offunction , in this case we have just called it f usually we would give it more meaningful names . then itsays that this function takes three values as inputs , so these are called parameters or arguments . so ,the first one is called a , the second is called b , and third is called c , and within the body of theprogram of the function a , b and c will refer to the values which are passed to this function for agiven call . within a function we might have a statement like this called return . the body of thefunction is indented like we had for if , while and for , and the return statement if it is encountered , itsays that at this point the execution of the function will end and you will get back to where youcalled function from returning the value in the name v. this could be any expression we could justhave return of a constant or return of v plus one or whatever . when we call a function we have topass values for the arguments , and this is actually done exactly the same way as assigning that valueto a name . suppose , we have function like this which takes x and raises it to the power n. let us justlook at the function just to understand what the code is doing . we assume that the value of theanswer is . and now for as many i as there are in the range to n minus we multiply x into answerso we get effectively x times , x times , x n times . each time we go through this loop we multiply onemore x and finally we return the answer that we have got . now the way we would use this functionin our code is to write an expression of the form , say power , , so obviously , what this means isthat should be used for x and should be used for n and we would then run this code with thevalues x equal to and n equal to . actually , you can imagine that when we run this code , it is asthough we have this code inserted into our program at this point preceded by this assignment . so ,this assignment basically says set the value of the name x to the value passed by this namely , set nto . this assignment is what takes place effectively when you call a function . and since it is anassignment , this behaves very much like assignment in the regular case . in particular the same rulesapply for mutable and immutable values . remember we said that when we write something like xequal to y , if it is immutable that is the value in y can not be change in place then we copy the valueand we get a fresh copy in x , so the value in x and the value in y are disjoint . so this is if it isimmutable . and if it is mutable , we said we do not copy , we share the value that is , both names willpoint to the same copy of the value , so change in one will also make a change in the other thathappens with mutable things like lists . immutable values will not be affected at the calling point inour case and mutable values will be affected . it is as though we are making an assignment of theexpression or the name in the calling function , calling point to the name in the function . so , if thefunction modifies that name , the value of that name if it is immutable value , nothing will happenhere , if it is a mutable value something will happen . so , here is a simple function just to illustrate thispoint . the aim of this function is to update a list . so , i give you a list which is called in this function land i give you a position which is i and what i want to do is i want to replace whatever is there by anew value v. so i get three arguments , l is a list , and then i is the index of the position , and finally v isthe value to be replaced . so , what do we do ? first check that the index is a valid index . we check thatit lies between and l minus . so it is greater than equal to and it is strictly lesser the length of l. ifso , what we do is just replace l of i by the value v which we have got and we return true to indicatethat the update succeeded . now if i is not in this range then we can not do an update . so , what wewill do is effectively return false . this is just say that the update did not work and then the person ,the part of code which is calling this can understand that something went wrong and presumablywhat went wrong is the index was not in the valid range . but just to illustrate what happens withimmutable values , in this case we are also updating for no good reason the value v to be v plus . so ,remember that v is being passes a value to be put in here and we are assuming normally that vwould be a immutable value . let us assume we call it now , so what we use do is we set up a list ofnumbers , , and then we want to replace this say by . so , just for the sake of argument wefirst set up a new name z called and we say update the list n s at position , so remember thepositions are , , . so , update the list in position by the value of z. and then we say update thesame list at position by the value of z. now as we saw if the values right then this if will fail , so itwill instead go here , this wo n't work , so it will go here . and what will happen inside the code is that vwill be incremented , now v has been copied from z. the question is what happens to z ? so , as youwould expect after executing these four statements , because of this update succeeding the value of zis copied into the list that position and so we get the value instead of the value that we startedwith . on the other hand , if we execute this statement , then because this is an immutable value thechange in v inside the function does not affect z at all . although v has been incremented from to ,z remains . this is just to illustrate that if we pass a parameter , through a parameter a value that ismutable it can get updated in function and this is sometimes called a side effect . so the functionaffects the value in the other program , so this is called a side effect . a side effect can happen if thevalue is mutable , but if the value is immutable then the value does not change no matter what we doinside the program . now , there are couple of other points to note about this function just toillustrate one is that we have here two return statements return true or return false . the idea is thatthey indicate to the calling function whether or not the update succeeded . so ideally you shouldhave said something like result is equal to update , and then check after the update where the resultis true or false . remember update will update the list or not update the list depending on whetherthe index is valid and it will return true or false depending on whether they update succeeded . so , byexamining the value of whatever is returned we can check whether the update we intended workedor not . this is something which we would expect but we have not done it , so this is just to illustratethat there may be a return value but may be the idea is a function will actually update some mutablevalue so we do not care what it returns all the work is done inside the function . even though there isa return value you are not obliged to use it , you can just call a function as a separate statement as wehave done here it does not have to be part of an assignment . the other thing is that because of thisthere may be functions which do not return anything useful at all . a typical example would be afunction which just displays a message like there was an error or it displays some other indicativethings for you to understand what your code is doing . now such a function just as to displaysomething , it does not have to compute or return anything . so , there may be no return function . so ,by default what happens is that a function executes like everything else from top to bottom when itis involved . and now if you encounter a return statement at that point the function stops executingand you go back . on the other hand if you run out of statements to execute , if you reach the laststatement then there is nothing more then also the function will end . there is no obligation for afunction to actually have a return statement . so , a return statement is useful if the functioncomputes the value and gives you back some result which you will use later on , but you may havefunctions which do not have return value , in which case you can either return some empty thing oryou can return nothing and everything will work fine . another point to note about functions inpython is that names within a function are disjoint from names outside a function . so let us look atagain at a kind of toy example which does not have anything useful to do . we have a function whichwe call stupid which takes essentially takes an argument and return it , so it does nothing . but inbetween what it does is it just for no good reason sets name n to have the . now suppose we hadin our program outside , a statement which assigned the value to the name n and then we call thisfunction . now obviously , if we say stupid of then v will also be the input , so v will become . thequestion is that while executing the fact that v is the function internally set n equal to . thequestion is , we have asked n to be then we call this function n became inside the function is nnow or not . so the answer is that n is still and that is because the n inside and the n outside aretwo different copies of n. so , any name which is used in side of function is to be thought of as disjointfrom the name outside . names outside are not visible inside , the names inside are not visibleoutside . now this is not something that you would normally do because is just confusing if you usethe same name inside and outside , but sometimes it is useful to have this separation because veryoften we do use common things like i j k run through list you know like ranges and things like that .and it will be a nuisance if we have to use a , remember and use i outside and j inside and make surethat they do not interact . since they do not interact anyway we can freely use i j wherever we wantand not worry about the fact that we are already how i or j outside in the calling function . one of thethings that we mentioned up front was that a function must be defined before it is invoked . now thisis a slightly subtle point , so let us just look at it little more . remember that a python program is readfrom top to bottom by the interpreter . so , when the python program is read it reads the definition off , but does not execute it , and notice that this definition of f has an invocation to g which is actuallylater . but the point is when reading definition of f g is not used it is only remembered that thisstatement which should be in a bracket , just to be consistent . so , this statement should be computedif i call f so it is not calling f it is just defining f. so , i define f , then i define g , finally when i come tothis statement it says what is f of . so , f of will come here and we will say f of is nothing but gof right so that will come here . and it will say g of is nothing but so it will come here . so .and then finally i will get . so , it is only when i execute the statement f is executed at that time ghas already been seen . though we say a function must be defined before it is invoked it does not ruleout the fact that one function can call a function which is defined after it , provided that you use thisfunction only after that definition . so this sequence is fine . suppose , we rewrote this sequence in adifferent way , so supposing we had the definition of f then we had this statement . we have basicallyexchanged these two statements . now what happens is that when the python interpreter comesdown this line at this point it will try and call f , so f will try and call g and g will say well i do not havea definition for g yet because i am not yet gone past this statement . so if i put this statement ,execute f before i define g and f requires g then this statement will create an error whereas thisstatement will not . it s really useful if we define all functions upfront because any inter dependencybetween functions will be resolved right way by the interpreter and we do not have to worry aboutit . whereas , if we do this inter mixing of functions and statements then we have to be careful thatfunctions do not refer to the later things which have not been scanned yet by the interpreter . this isone more reason to put all your function definitions at the beginning and only then have thestatements that you want to execute . a final point that we will return to later when we go throughmore interesting examples as we proceed in programming , is that a function can very well call itself .the most canonical function of this kind , these are called recursive functions . functions which relyon themselves . is the factorial function . if you remember n factorial is defined to be n into n minusinto n minus into n down to . so you take n and multiply it by all the numbers smaller than itselfup to and by definition factorial is defined to be . what we observe in this definition is that , thispart from n minus to is actually the same as n minus factorial . in other words n factorial can bedefined in terms of a smaller factorial it is n times n minus factorial , so that is what this function isexploiting . there is a base case factorial of is and since the factorial of negative numbers is notdefined and we want to be safe we can say that if n is equal to or n is less then equal to we return. so this is what we normally call the base case . in this case the factorial is completely definedwithout having to do any further work . now if n is not less than equal to then n is greater than . ifn is greater than then we take the current number and we multiply it by the smaller factorial that isexactly the definition given above . so if i take say factorial of , this will result in times factorial ofso that will invoke this function again and this will give me times factorial of and so on . factorialof will give me times factorial of and the point is that factorial will now terminate and it willgive me , because it says that argument is less than or equal to return . this will return nowcome back and get multiplied here , so you get times , so times will come here and will comehere , so then this will bring back and then times this will become . this is how the function willexecute we will talk about this more later , but just to illustrate that functions can very well callthemselves . to summarize , functions are a good way to organize your code into logical chunks . so ifyou have a unit of computation which is done repeatedly and very often done with different possiblestarting values then you should push it aside into a function . if you break up your code into smallerfunctions , it is much easier to understand , to read and to maintain . when we pass arguments to afunction it is exactly like assigning values to a name . so , the values that are passed can get updated ina function only if they are mutable , if they are immutable any change within a function does notaffect the argument outside . also if we use the same name inside a function as is found outside afunction the name inside the function does not in any way affect the name outside . so , functionshave local notion of what we call scope . there is a scope of a name where is a name understood , sothe name inside a function does not exist outside and vice versa . also functions must be definedbefore they are used and this is a good reason to push all your function definitions to the beginningof your program , so that the python interpreter will digest them all before there are actually invoked .so if there are mutual dependencies we do not have a problem . finally , we saw that we can writeinteresting functions which call themselves and we will see many more examples of this in the weeksto come . in the past few lectures , we have looked at values of different types in python , starting withthe numbers and then moving onto the booleans and then sequences such as strings and lists . nowlet us go back to the order in which statements are executed . remember we said that a typicalpython program will have a collection of function definitions followed by a bunch of statements . ingeneral , the python interpreter will read whatever we give it from top to bottom . so , when it seesthe definition of a function , it will digest it but not execute it . we will look at function definitions inmore detail very soon . and when we now come to something which is not a definition then pythonwill try to execute it , this in turn could involve invoking a function in which case the statementswhich define the function will be executed and so on . however , if we have this kind of a rigidstraight line execution of our program then we can only do limited things . this means we have aninflexible sequence of steps that we always follow regardless of what we want to do . now in manysituations , many realistic situations , we need to vary the next step according to what has happenedso far , according to the current values that we see . let us look at a real life example . supposing , youare packing your things to leave for the bus stop in the morning , or whether or not you take anumbrella with you will depend on whether you think it is going to rain that day . if you carry theumbrella all the time then your bag becomes heavy , if you do not carry the umbrella ever , then yourisk the chance of being wet . so , you would stop at this point and see , in whatever way by readingthe weather forecast or looking out of the window is it likely to rain today ? if it is likely to rain ,ensure that the umbrellas in your bag , put it if it is not there , or leave it if it is already there . if it isnot likely to rain , ensure the umbrella is not in the bag , if it is not there it is fine otherwise , take itout . so , this kind of execution which varies the order in which statements are executed is referred toin programming languages as control flow . there are three fundamental things all of which we havesee informally in the gcd case . one is what we just describe the conditional execution . the other iswhen we want to repeat something a fixed number of times and this number of times is known inadvance . we want to carry boxes from this room to that room , so times we carry one box at atime from here to there . on the other hand , sometime we may want to repeat something where thenumber of repetitions is not known in advance . suppose , we put sugar in our tea cup and we want tostir it till the sugar dissolves . so , what we will do , we stir it once check , if there is still sugar stir itagain , check it there is still sugar and so on , and as the sugar dissolves finally after one round we willfind there is no sugar at the bottom of the cup and we will stop stirring . here , we will repeat thestirring action a number of times , but we will not know in advance whether we have to stir it twice orfive times , we will stir until the sugar dissolves . let us begin with conditional execution . conditionalexecution in python is written as we saw using the 'if statement ' . we have 'if ' , then we have aconditional expression which returns a value true or false typically a comparison , but it could also beinvoking a function which returns true or false for example , and we have this colon which indicatesthe end of the condition . and then the statement to be executed conditionally is indented , so it is setoff from the left so that python knows that this statement is governed by this condition . we makethis simultaneous assignment of m taking the old value of n , and n taking the value of m divided byn , only if m divided by n currently is not . the second statement is executed conditionally , only if thecondition evaluates to true and indentation demarcates the body of the 'if ' . the body refers to thosestatements which are governed by the condition that we have just checked . so , let us look at a smallkind of illustration of this . suppose , we have code which looks as follows we have if condition thenwe have two indented statements statement and statement , and then we have a thirdstatement which is not indented . the indentation tells python that these two statements areconditionally executed depending on the value of this condition . however , statement is notgoverned by this condition , because it is pushed out to the same level as the if . so , by governing bydescribing where your text lies , you can decide the beginning and the end of what is governed by thiscondition . in a conventional programming language , you would have some kind of punctuationtypically something like a brace to indicate the beginning and the end of the block , which is governedby the condition . one of the nice things about python which makes it easier to learn and to use andread is the dispensation with many of these punctuations and syntactic things which makeprogramming languages difficult to understand . so , when you are trying to learn a programminglanguage , you would like to start programming and not spend a lot of time understanding where toput colons , semicolons , open braces and close braces and so on . python tries to minimize this andthat makes it an attractive language both to learn and to write code in if you are doing certain kindsof things . python will not have this and then we will see a much cleaner program as a result . onething we have emphasized before and , i will say it again is that this indentation has to be uniform inother words , it must be the same number of spaces . the most dangerous thing you can do is to use amixture of tabs and spaces , when you press the tab on your keyboard it inserts some number ofspaces which might look equal to you when you see it on the screen , but python does not confusetabs and spaces . so , one tab is not going to be equal to three spaces or four spaces or whatever yousee on the screen and the more worried thing is the python will give you some kind of errormessage which is not very easy to understand . so , it is quite useful to not get into the situation byremembering to always use exactly some uniform strategy for example , two spaces to indentwhenever you have such a nested block . quite often , we have two alternatives one to be taken if thecondition is true , and the other to be taken if the condition is not true . if it is likely to rain ensure theumbrella is in the bag , else ensure the umbrella is not in the bag . in this case for example , if theremainder is not continue with new values for m and n if the remainder is then we have foundthe gcd namely the smaller with two values . this is indicated using the such special word else whichis like the english else again with the colon and again , we have nesting to indicate what goes into theelse and the if and the else should be nested at the same level . the else is optional , so we could havethe 'if ' without the else . technically speaking , the condition that we put into an 'if statement ' mustbe an expression that explicitly returns boolean value true or false . but like many other programminglanguages , python relaxes this a little bit and allows different types of expressions which havedifferent values like the types we have seen so far like numbers and list to also be interpreted it astrue or false . in particular , any number , any expression , which returns a number , any numericexpression of value is treated as false . similarly , any empty sequence such as the empty string orthe empty list is also treated as false . and anything which is not in this case , so if i have a nonzerovalue as a number or if i have a nonempty string a string with seven characters or a nonempty list alist with three values then all of these would be interpreted as true if i just stick them into acondition . so , this can simplify our expressions and our code . instead of saying m percent n as wesaid before m percent n not equal to . remember if it is not equal to , then it is true . if thiscondition holds is the same as asking whether m percent n is a nonzero value , and if it is nonzerovalue we want to replace m and n , so we can just write if m percent n. so this is a shortcut , now useit with care sometimes if you are used to it and if you are familiar with what is going on , this cansimplify the way you write things , but if you are not familiar with what you are going on , you canmake mistakes . so , if you are in doubt , write the full comparison if you are not in doubt or if it is veryobvious , then go with the shortcut . here is a very common situation that occurs sometimes we donot want to check between one of two conditions , but one of many conditions . so , supposing wehave a value x , name x which can take a value , , or and depending on whether it is , , or ,you want to do four different things with which we called f , f , f and f . so , if we simulate this fourway choice , using a if and else then we have to make some comparison first . supposing , we firstcheck if x is equal to , then we invoke f . if x is not , then it is one of the others , so all of this goesinto an else and everything gets nested . then we check in this case , if x is equal to then we do fotherwise , we have or , so now all of this is nested once again . and finally , we have x is equal toor not , so this is x is equal to and then we are done , but the main problem with this is that first ofall this code is getting indented . so , as you go into this nested if structure to simulate this multi waybranch that we have essentially a four way branch x could take one of four values , where each ofthese four values you want to do four different things . if we simulate it by taking , , waydecisions , we check or not , then we check or not , and then we check or not then we havethis ugly nesting and secondly , we have this else followed immediately by an if . python has a shortcutfor this which is to combine the else and the if into a second check elif . so , this on the right is exactlythe same as the left as for as python is concerned . it checks the condition x is equal to , if the x isequal to then it will invoke f , otherwise , it will invoke the rest . now the rest , we have just collapsethe else and if to directly check a new condition if this condition holds then this works otherwise , itwill check the rest and so on . so , we can replace nested else if by elif in this way , and it makes thecode more readable because it tells us that we are actually doing a multi way check . and notice thatthe last word in elif is again an else . so , if you have say seven different options , and you are onlydoing special things so , , , and , , , are all the same then we can use else we do not haveexplicitly enumerate all the other option . so , we have a number of explicit conditions that we check .so , by the way this and notice the type or they should not be a ok. so , we have a number of explicitconditions we check with if and a sequence or elifs , and finally , we have an else , the else again isoptional like it is with the normal if , but the main thing is it avoids this long indentation sequencewhich makes the code very difficult to read later on . the first type of control flow which we haveseen is conditional execution and the other type is loops . in a loop , we want to do somethingrepeated number of times . so , the most basic requirement is do something a fix number of times .for instance , we have the statement for which is the keyword in python . so , what python says is takea new name and let it run through a sequence of values , and for each value in this sequenceexecutes this once right . so , this is in sequence , it is multiplying y by then the result by then theresult by and so on . the end of this will have y times times , times , times , and we will have zplus plus plus plus four times because each time we are adding to z. so , this should beoutcome of this loop . the main thing is exactly like if , we have indentation to mark the body of aloop . the most common case for repeating things is to do something exactly n times . so , instead ofwriting out a list to n , what we saw is that we can generate something equivalent to this list byusing this built in function range . the range , , we said it starts at and it generates the sequenceof the form , , stopping at n minus . this is similar to the similar positional convention in pythonwhich says that the positions in a list go from to the length of the list minus . range also does notgo from to n , but to n minus . so , instead of writing for i in a list , we can write for i in a range ,and this is from the point of view of python the same thing , either we can let this new name rangeover an explicit list or an implicit sequence given by the range function . in general range i , j , like aslice i to j , starts at i and goes up to j minus . we can also have range functions which count downand we can have range functions which skip a value we can do every alternate value and so on . wewill see these variations on range a little later , but for now just note that we can either have forstatement which explicitly goes through a list of values . so , we can give a list and ask for to gothrough each value in that list or we can generate a sequence of n values by using the range function .let us look at a simple example of this . suppose , we want to find all the factors of a number n , allnumbers that divide n without a remainder . as we recalled when we did gcd , all the divisors orfactors of a number must lie between and n we can not have any number bigger than n , which is afactor of n. one simple way to check the list of factors is to try every number from to n , and see if itdivides , so here is a very simple function for it . so , we define a function called factors of n which isgoing to give back a list of all the factors . internally we use a name flist to the record this list . theflist , the next list of factors is initially empty . and now keeping in mind that all the factors lie betweenand n , we generate in sequence all the numbers from to n , and remember this requires the upperbound of the range to be n plus , because the range function stops one below the number which isthe right hand side . so , this will generate a sequence , , up to n. and what we check is if there isno remainder when n is divided by i then we add i to this list . and remember that plus for a list andfor a sequence is concatenation it actually adds a value to a list , and this allows us to return a newlist . the end of this , we have computed all the factors of n and return them as a list . but as we said atthe beginning of today s lectures , sometimes we want to do something some number of timeswithout knowing the number of times in advance like stirring the sugar in the cup . we saw anexample of this with the gcd . so what we did was , we have another statement like for called while .while executes something so long as a condition holds , so we execute this body so , long as thiscondition evaluates to true , and then when we have finished executing this we come back and checkagain whether this condition is true or not . so the danger is that every time we come back thecondition will be true and this thing will never end in the for case we know in advance that it willexecute exactly as many times is length of the sequence that we started . so , when we start a for loopwe give a fix sequence that fix sequence has a fix length and so we must terminate the loop in thatmany executions . in a while we come back we check the condition again , but there is a everypossibility that the condition will never become true . we have to ensure when we write a while loopthat somehow this sequence of statements to execute inside the while must eventually make thisthing to be false , because if this thing never become false , condition will never , the loop will neverterminate . the example we saw with gcd was the variation of what we wrote so far . we first ofcourse check and swap , so that the bigger number is first and now we check whether the biggernumber is divisible by the smaller . so , so long as this is not the case , we exchange values for m and n .we make m point to the smaller number n , and we make n point to the remainder , which will be stillsmaller and eventually this thing will become false , we will get the situation where n divides m andthe remainder is and at that point we have found the gcd . this is a simple example , remember thatby our earlier convention we could also write this as while m percent n make this thing . so , we donot need this explicit not equal to , because the value m percent n if it is not is treated as true andthe loop will go one more time , but now in some situations it may or may not be so easy read this . itmight be useful to just say explicitly not equal to , just to illustrate to yourself and to the personreading your code what is going on . to summarize , a python interpreter normally executes code fromtop to bottom in sequence . we can alter the control flow in three ways we have seen . one is usingthe 'if statement ' , which conditionally executes and this extends to the elif which allows us to do amulti way branch . then there is for statement which allows us to repeat something a fixed numberof times that providing a list or a sequence of values from range . and then we have a repetitionwhich is based on a condition using a while statement where we put a condition and then the body isexecuted each time the condition is checked again so long this is true the body keeps repeating . youbegan with the numeric types , which divided into two categories int and float . so , int representedwhole numbers or integers , and float represented values which have a decimal point . and for these ,we had arithmetic operations such as plus , minus , times , divide and also other functions which wecan import using the math library , which is built into python . then we introduce a new type of value ,which may not be so familiar for logical values true and false which are of type bool . we can operateon these values using functions such as not , which negates the value makes at the opposite 'and ' and'or ' . and when we do comparisons between numeric values for instances the outcome of such acomparison is typically a bool value and we can combine these comparisons using 'not ' and 'and ' tomake complex conditions . in the previous lecture , we look at strings . so , strings are used torepresent text a string is of type str . it is a sequence of characters . and since it is a sequence we cantalk about positions in the sequence . the position start numbering at and go up to n minus onewhere n is the length of the string . if we say s square bracket i for a string value s then we get the ithposition using this numbering convention . and a slice gives us a sub sequence a string from position ito position j minus one written s square bracket i colon j. the basic operation we can do with stringsis to glue them together using the plus operation . plus means concatenation for strings and notaddition in the arithmetic sense , we can extract the length of a string using the len function and wesaid that we will look at more complex string functions later on . today we move on to lists . a list isalso a sequence of values , but a list need not have a uniform type . so , we could have a list calledfactors , which has numbers , , , . we could have a list called names , which are anand , charlesand muqsit . but we could also have a list , which we have called mixed which contains a number orboolean and a string now it is not usual to have list which have different types of values at differentpositions , but python certainly allows it . while we will normally have list which are all integers or allstrings or all boolean values it could be the case that different parts of a list have different types . alist is a sequence in the same way as a string is and it has positions to n minus where n is thelength of the list . so , we can now extract values at a given position or we can extract slices . in thisexample if we take the list factors and we look at the third position remember that the positions arelabelled , , , then factors of is . similarly , if you take the list mixed and we take the slice fromto minus then we get the sub list consisting of and . as with a string , the length of the list isgiven by the function len . so , len of names is because there are , , values in names . rememberthat length is just a normal length , whereas the positions are numbered from to n minus . there isone difference between list and strings and what we have seen so far . we said that there was noconcept of a single character . in a string if we take the value at single position or we take a string asub string of length , we get the same thing . so , if we have the string h , which has position , , , ,sorry , , , said as length . and if we ask for the th position then this gives us the letter h. butthe letter h in python is indistinguishable from the string h similarly if we ask for the sub sequencefrom to , but not including then again we get the string h. so , in one case it 's as though weconstructed a sub string of length one in one case we got a single character , but python does notdistinguish . so , h of is actually equal as a value the sub the slice h colon . now , this will nothappen with the list in general . so , if we have a list right a list consist again positions , , , say .and now we take the th position we get a value , we get the value we do not get a list . on theother hand if we take the slice from up to and not including then we get the sub list of factors oflength containing the value . so , factors of is , factors of colon the slice is also , but herewe have a single value here we have a list and therefore , these two things are not equal to eachother right . just remember this that in a string we can not distinguish between a single value at aposition and a slice of length one . they give us exactly the same type of value and the same valueitself . whereas , in a list a slice of length one is a list whereas , a value at a position is a single value atthat position . now , nested list can contain other list , so this is called nesting . for example , we canhave a nested list . this contains a single value at the beginning which is another list . this is position. this is position , sorry position . this is position and this is position . position is a singlesimple value an integer an integer position is a list , which in turn as itself two position and .and the value position is itself another list . so , it is a third level of nested list which as a single value. similarly , the value at position is itself a string and therefore , this has seq is this is a sequenceand it as its own position . if we look at this example then we can see that if we want to look at theth position in nested then as we said we get this value and this value consist of a list itselfcontaining and the list containing . on the other hand , if we ask for the first position numberthen we get the value . and now if we look at the position , which is this list then , in that we lookat the th position which is this string and in that we look for the third character which is , , ,this l right . nested of takes us to the last value in the list nested in that we look at position , whichis the first value in the nested list . and in that we look at position which is the third character in thesequence contained in that position and we get the character l or the string l actually . in the sameway we can also take slices . so , we can take the th position which is this list then we ask for the slicestarting at and going up to , but not including so that means , we start with this value . and so weget the list containing the list . notice that the inner list is the value , right . this is the value that liesbetween position and up to position and the outer list is because , when we take a slice of a listwe get a list . this is sub list of this list comma list which gives us just the list we have droppedthe value , but we get a sub list . this is what we mentioned before for list a slice gives us back a list .let us just conform that these things behave as we said . here we have just loaded the pythoninterpreter with that example . nested is this list and if you say now nested you get , if saynested we get a value . now if we say nested we get this list . we say nested , then it dropsthe list and just gives us a string and if we say nested , , then we get the string l as we saidbefore . and then , we said that we can now update for instances nested , none update sorry we canlook at nested and take this slice colon and this goes to the first list and gives us the listcontaining the list containing . so , the outer list is because it is a slice and inner one is because thevalue in position one of the first item in the list nested is itself a list containing . one fundamentaldifference between list and string or indeed any of the values we have seen before is that a list canbe updated in place . so , if we have a list nested as we had before and we say nested of is .remember when we try to change a position in a string we got an error . we can not change thesecond l in hello to p just by saying that we want position three to be replaced by p , but for a list thisis allowed . if we want to to be replaced by , we can just say nested one equal to seven and thiswill give us the list , , and then hello and we can do this inside as well . we can say that we wantto go into this list which is nested then we want to go into this list which is nested , then wewant to go into this value and change this value . we want to change the value at the position ofthe nested list at position of this initial value . we say nested , , equal to and this changesthat thirty seven into nineteen , so this is allowed . what we say in python notation is that lists aremutable , so mutation is to change . a list can be transformed in place we can take a list and change itsstructure unlike a string if we try to change a string we have to actually construct a new string and reassign the name , but in a list with the same name we can update parts of it without affecting theother parts . once again let us check that what we have done actually works . so , if i say nested of isequal to say . then the list nested the same name now as a in place of the value if i say nestedof , which is the first list at , which is the second nested list at is equal to , right . so , this says goand turn to into a and indeed this does happen right . so , this is a difference between list andstrings . lists are mutable values we can go and change values at given position without affecting thename in the rest of the list . it is important to understand the distinction between mutable andimmutable values , because this plays an important role in assignment . and as you will later see , italso plays a major role in what happens when we pass values to functions as arguments . let us lookat what happens when we assign names . suppose we go through the following sequence ofassignments . we initially assign the value to the name x then we assign the name the value and thename x to the value y and then we reassign x to seven . we started with x being then we said y isalso , because y is a value of x. and now we changed x to . so , the question we would like to ask ishas the value of y changed . let us do this and see what happens to that right . let us start with xequal to , y equal to x. so , if we ask for the value of y at this point it is as we expect . now wechange x to seven the question is it is y or y and indeed y is still and this is perfectly natural asfar as our understanding goes that what we did , when we set the value of y to the value of x. so , letwe make it we did not say make it the same value was x forever hence forth . as saw the value of yactually did not change and the question is why it should change . after all it seems natural that whenwe assign a value to the value of another name then what we are actually doing is saying copy thatvalue and make a fresh copy of it . so , x is will make why the same value as x currently is it does notmean that make y and x point to the same value it means make y also . so , if x gets updated to itas no effect on y. this question actually is not so simple while our intuition says that assignmentshould always copy the value . in some cases it does happens that both names end up pointing to thesame value . so , for immutable values we can assume what we are intuition says that whenever weassign a name a value we get a fresh copy of that value . this applies to all the types we have seenbefore today s lecture namely int float bool and string these are all immutable . if we do the kind ofassignment we did before where we assign something to x then make y is the same value was x andthen update x , y will not change . updating one value does not affect the copy , because we haveactually copied the value . however as we are pointed out lists are difference beast from strings andlist are mutable . it turns out that for mutable values assignment does not make a fresh copy . let uslook at the following example we first assign say the list , , , to the name list , then we say thatlist is the same as list . if we had this copy notation now you would have two copies of the listsuppose we now use the mutability of list to change the value at position namely this value toright . the question is what has happened to list , is list the same as before namely , , , or aslist also become , , , like list . so , lets us see what happens in the interpreter . let us run thisexample in python . so , we say list is equal to , , , list is equal to list . list is indeed , , ,and . now we update in place list , to be equal to . we say that list is , , , , the has beenreplaced by . the question we are asking is has this affected list or not and contrary to ourintuition that we have the values are copied in which case list has indirectly has effected the valueof list as well . so , why does this happen . so , list to is also and this that is because , when weactually make assignment like this from one name to another name and the other name holds amutable value in this case the only mutable type that we have seen so far is a list . then instead ofsaying that they are two copies , we actually just say that list is pointing if you like to a value of list ,, , . and now we also have another name for the same list namely list . if we go and change thisvalue to , then list also has same value at this position . there is a fundamental difference willhow assignment works for mutable and immutable types . for mutable types we can think ofassignment as making a fresh copy of the value and for immutable types and for mutable typesassignment does not make a fresh copy it rather makes both names point to exactly the same value .through either name if we happened to update the mutable value the other name is also effected .this is something which we will see is useful in certain situations , but what if we do not want this tohappen what if we want to make a real copy of the list . so , recall that a slice takes a list and returnsus a sub list from one position to another position . the outcome of a slice operation is actually a newlist , because in general , we take a list and we will take a part of it for some intermediate position tosome other intermediate position , so obviously , the new list is different from the old list . we also sawthat when we looked at strings that we can leave out the first position or the last position whenspecifying a slice . if we leave out the first position as this then we will implicitly say that the firstposition is , so we start at the beginning . similarly , if we leave out the last position like this , then weimplicitly assume that the last position the slice is the length of this list of the string and so it goes tothe last possible value . if we leave out the first position , we get a if we leave out the last position ,we get the length . if we leave out both position , we just put colon with nothing before nothing afterlogically this becomes and this becomes the length . we have both characteristics in the same thingand we call this a full slice . now let us combine this observation which is just a short cut notationwith this observation that each slice creates a new sub list . so , what we have is that l with just acolon after it is not the same as l it is the new list created from the old list , but it as every value in l inthe same sequence . this now gives us a simple solution to copy a list instead of saying list is equalto list , which makes then both . remember if i do not have this then i will get list and list pointingto the same actual list . there will be only list of values and will point to the same . but if i do therehave this then the picture changes then what happens is that the slice operation produces a new listwhich has exactly the same length and the same values and it makes list point to that . therefore ,after this list and list are disjoint from each other any update to list will not affect list any updateto list will not affect list . let us see how this works in the interpreter to convince ourselves this isactually the way python handles this assignment . as before let us start with list is , , , and listnow let us say is the slice . so , now , if is update list at position to be then list looks like , , , .but list which was a copy is not affected right . when we take a slice we get a new list . so , if we takethe entire list as a full slice we get a full copy of the old list and we can assign it safely to a new nameand not worry about the fact that both names are sharing the value . this leads us to a digression onequality . let us look now at this set of python statements . we create a list , , , and give with thename list and , when we create another list , , , , and give it the name list . and finally , weassign list to be the same values as list and this as be said suggest that list is actually pointing tothe same thing . so , we have now pictorially we have two list of the form , , , stored somewhere .and initially we say that list points to this and list points to this in the last assignment say that listalso points to this . all three lists are equal , but there is a difference in the way that they are equal .so , list and list are two different lists , but they have the same value right . so , they happen to havethe same value , but they are two different things and so , if we operate on one it need not preservethis equality any more . on the other hand list and list are equal precisely because they points tothe same value , there is exactly one list in to which they are both pointing . so , if we update list orwe update list they will continue to remain equal . there are two different notions of equalitywhether the value is the same or the actual underline object that we are referring to by this name isthe same . in the second case , updating the object to either name is going to result in both namescontinuing to be equal . python has we saw this operation equal to equal to , which is equivalent orthe mathematically equality which checks if x and y as names have the same value . so , this willcapture the fact that list is equal to list even though they are two different lists they happen tohave the same value . to look at the second type of equality that list and list are actually the samephysical list in the memory . we have another key word in python called 'is ' . so , when we say x is ywhat we are asking is , whether x and y actually point to the same memory location the same value inwhich case updating x will effect y and vice versa . we can say that x is y checks if x and y refer to thesame object . going by this description of the way equal to equal to and is work obviously , if listlist are the same object they must always be equal to equal to . so , x is y then x will always equal toequal to y , because there are actually pointing to the same thing . but in this case although list listare possibly different list they are still equal to equal to , because the value is the same . on theother hand if i look at the is operation then list list is list happens to be true , because we haveseen that this assignment will not copy the list it will just make list point to the same thing is list .on other hand list is list is false that is because they are two different list . so , once again its best toverify this for ourselves to convince ourselves that this description is actually accurate . let us typeout those three lines of python in the interpreter . so , we say list is , , , list is also , , , andlist is list . now , we ask whether list is equal to list and it indeed is true , but if we ask whetherlist is list then it says false . so , this means that list and list are pointing to the same valuephysically . so , we update one it will not update the other . on the other hand , if we ask whether listis list then this is true . if for instance we change list , to be equal to , like we are done in theearlier example then list has now become , , , . so , if we ask if list is equal to list at this pointas values that 's false . therefore , because list continues to be , , , and list has becomehowever , if we ask whether list is equal to list is true that is the case , because list is list in thesense if they both are the same physical list and so when we updated list list will also be updatedvia list . like strings , we can combine lists together using the plus operator . so , plus is concatenation .so , if we have list is the value , , , list is the value , , , . then list equal to list plus listwill produce for us the value , , , , , , , . one important thing to recognise in our context ofmutable and immutable values is that plus always produces a new list . if we say that list is , , ,and then we copy this list as a name to list . we saw before that we have , , , and we have twonames list and list . now if we update list by saying list plus nine this will actually generate afresh list which has a nine at the end and it will make list point their and list will no longer be thesame right . so , list and list will no longer point to the same object . let just confirm this . in thepython interpreter let us set up list is equal to , , , and say list is equal to list . then as wesaw before if we say list is list we have true . if on the other hand we reassign list to be the oldvalue of list plus a new value . this extends , list to be , , , , . now we will see the list isunchanged . so , list and list have become decoupled because which time we apply plus it is liketaking slice . each time we apply plus we actually get a new list . so , list is no longer pointing to thelist it was originally pointing to . it is pointing to a new list constructed from that old list with aappended to it at the end . to summarise we have now seen a new type of value called list . so , list isjust a sequence of values . these values need not be of a uniform type , we can have mixed listconsisting or list , boolean , integers , strings . although almost always we will encounter list , where theunderline content of a list is of a fixed type . so , all position will actually typically have a uniform type ,but this is not required by python and we can nest list . so , we can have list of list and list of list of listand so on . as with strings , we can use this square bracket notation to obtain the value at a positionor we can use the square bracket with colon notation to get a sub list or a slice . one new feature ofpython , which we introduced with list , is a concept of a mutable value . so , a list can be updated inplace we can take parts of a list and change them without effecting the remaining parts it does notcreate a new list in memory . one consequence is this is that we have to look at assignment morecarefully . for immutable values the types we have seen so far , int , float , bool and string when we sayx equal to y the value of y is copied to x. so , updating x does not affect y and vice versa . but when wehave mutable values like list we say l is equal to l then l and l both point to the same list . so ,updating one will update the other , and so we be have little bit careful about this . if we really want tomake a copy , we use a full slice . so , we say l is equal to l colon with nothing before or after , this isimplicitly from to the length of l , and this gives us a fresh list with exact same contents as l . andfinally , we saw that we can use equality and is as two different operators to check whether twonames are equal to only in value or also are physically pointing to the same type . last week , we wereintroduced to notation of algorithms using the gcd example . we also saw informally some pythoncode , which we could understand but we have not actually been introduced to formal python syntax .let us start with some real python step . a typical python program would be written like this , we havea bunch of function definitions followed by a bunch of statements to be executed . so remember thatwe said python is typically interpreted , so an interpreter is a program , which will read python codeand execute it from top to bottom . so , the interpreter always starts at the beginning of you of pythoncode and reads from top to bottom . now , function definition is a kind of statement , but it does notactually result in anything happening , the python interpreter merely digests the function kind ofremembers the function definition . so that later on if an actual statement refers to this function itknows what to do . in this kind of organization the execution would actually start with the statementwhich is called statement . so , first you will digest k functions and then start executing , , , upto statement n. now there is no reason to do this . so , python actually allows you to freely mixfunction definitions and statements , and in fact , function definitions are also statements of a kind itsjust they do not result in something immediately happening , but rather in the function beenremembered . but one of things that python would insist is that if a function is used in a statementthat has to be executed that function should have been defined already either it must be a built infunction or its definition must be provided . so , it may use this kind of jumbled up order , we have tobe careful that functions are defined before they are used . also jumbling up the order of statementsand function definitions in this way , makes it much harder to read the program and understand whatit is doing . though it is not required by python as such as , it strongly recommended that all functiondefinition should be put at the top of the program and all the statements that form the main part ofthe code should follow later . what is a statement ? the most basic statement in python is to assign avalue to a name . so , we see examples and we have seen examples and here are some examples . so ,in the first statement i is a name and it is assigned a value in the second statement , j is a differentname and it is assigned an expression times i. so , in this expression , the value of i will besubstituted for the expression i here . so , if i have not already been assigned a value before , pythonwould not know what to substitute for i and it would be flagged as an error . when you use a name ofthe right hand side as part of an expression , you must make sure that it already has a valid value . andas we saw , you can also have statements which merely update a value . so , when we say j is equal to jplus it is not a mathematical statement , where the value of j is equal to the value of j plus . butrather that the old value of j which is on the right hand side is updated by adding to it and then itgets replaced as a new value j. this is an assignment statement , this equality assigns the valuecomputed form the right hand side given the current values of all the names if the name given on theleft hand side , with the same name can appear on both sides . the left hand side is a name and theright hand side in general is an expression . and in the expression , you can do things which are legal ,given the types of values in the expression . so , values have types if you have numbers , you canperform arithmetic operations if you have some others things , you can perform other operations .so , what operations are allowed depend on the values and this is given technically the name type .so , when we said type of values it is really specifying what kinds of operations are legally available onthat class of values . so the most basic type of value that one can think of are numbers . now inpython and in most programming languages numbers come in two distinct flavours as you can callthem integers and numbers which have fractional parts . so , in python these two types are called intand float . so , int refers to numbers , which have no decimal part , which have no fractional part . so ,these are whole numbers they could be negative . so , these are some examples of values of type int .on the other hand , if we have fractional parts then these are values of type float . normally inmathematics we can think of integers as being a special class of say real numbers . so , real numbersare arbitrary numbers with fractional parts integers are those real numbers which have no fractional .but in a programming language there is a real distinction between these two and that is , because ofthe way that these numbers are stored . so , when python has to remember values it has to representthis value in some internal form and this has to take a finite amount of space . if you are writingdown , say a manual addition sum you will write it down on a sheet of paper and depending on asheet of paper and the size of your handwriting there is a physical limit to how large a number youcan add on that given sheet of paper . in the same way any programming language , will fix in advancesome size of how many digits it uses to store numbers and in particular as you know almost allprogramming languages will internally use a binary representation . so , we can assume that everynumber whether an integer or real number is stored as a finite sequence of zeroes and ones whichrepresents its value . now , if this happens to be an integer you can just treat that binary sequence asa binary number as you would have learnt in school . so , the digits represent powers of , usuallythere will be one extra binary digit or indicate whether it is plus or minus and they may be othermore efficient ways of representing negative numbers , but in particular you can assume that integersare basically binary numbers . they are just written as integers in binary notation . now when wecome to non integers then we have two issues one is we have to remember the value which is thenumber of digits which make up the fractional part and then we have to remember the scale . so ,think of a number in scientific notation right , so , your normally have two parts when we use things inphysics and chemistry for instance , we have the value itself that is what are the components of thevalue and we have how we must shift it with respect to the decimal point . so , this says move thedecimal point digits to the right . so , this first part is called the mantissa right and this is called theexponent . so , when we have the number in memory if it is an int , then the entire string is justconsidered to be one value where as if we have block of digits which represents a float . then wehave some part of it , which is the mantissa , and the other part , which is the exponent . the samesequence of binary digits if we think of it as an int has a different value and if we think of it as a floathas a different value . so , why float you might ask . float is an old term for computer science forfloating point it refers to the fact that this decimal point is not fixed . so , an integer can be thought ofas a fixed decimal point at the end of the integer a floating point number is really a number wherethe decimal point can vary and how much it varies depends on the exponent . so there are basicallyfundamental differences in the way you represent integers and floating point numbers inside acomputer and therefore , one has to be careful to distinguish between the two . so , what can we dowith numbers ? well we have the normal arithmetic operations plus , minus , multiplication , which hasa symbol star modern x and division , which has a symbol slash . now notice that for the first threeoperations it is very clear if i have ints and i multiply them or add them or subtract them i get anint . but i have floats i will get a float , division , on the other hand will always produce a float if i sayand divided by , for instance where both are ints i will get an answer point . now in generalpython will allow you to mix ints and floats , so i can write plus point even though the left is anint and right is a float and it will correctly give me point . in that sense python respects the factthat floats are a generalized form of int . so , we can always think of an int as being a float with a pointat the end . so , we can sort of upgrade an int to a float if you want to think of it that way andincorporate with an expression , but division always produces floats . so , divided by point as anexample of a mixed expression , where i have an int and float and this division results in point andby two results in . . now there are some operations where we want to preserve the integernature of the operands . we have seen one repeatedly in gcd which is the modulus operator , theremainder operator . but the req corresponding operator that go through the reminder is thequotient operator . so , if i use a double slash it gives me the quotient . so , double slash says howmany times going to exactly without a fraction and that is because in a times is andtimes is which is bigger than and the remainder is . so , percent will be . anotheroperation which is quite natural and common is to raise one number to another number and this isdenoted by double star . double star is what we would write normally as to the power istimes , times , four times right and this is . now there are more advanced functions like log ,square root , sin and all which are also built into python , but these are not loaded by default . if youstart the python interpreter you have to include these explicitly . remember we said that we caninclude functions from a file we write using this import statement . there is a built in set of functionsfor mathematical things which is called math . so , we must add from math import star this can bedone even within the python program it does not have to be done only at the interpreter . so , whenwe write a python program where we would like to use log , square root and sin and such like , thenwe should add the line from math import star before we use these functions . we have seen threeconcepts names which are what we use to remember values , values which are the actual quantitieswhich we assign to names and we said that there is a notion of a type . so , type determines whatoperations are legal given the values that we have . so , the main difference between python andother languages is that names themselves do not have any inherent type . i do not say in advancethat the name i as an integer or the name x is a float . names have only the type that they arecurrently assigned to by a value that they have . the type of a name is not fixed . in a language like cor c or java we announce our names in advance . we declare them and say in advance what typethey have . so , if we see an i in an expression we know in advance that this i was declared to be oftype int this x was declared to be of type float and so on . now in python this is not the case . so , letus illustrate this with an example . so , the name main feature of python is that a name can beassigned values of different types as the program evolves . so , if we start with an assignment i equalsto since is an int i has a type int . now if we take an expression , which produces an int such astimes , i remain an int . now if we divide the value of i by . so , at this point if we had followed thesequence i is . so , by would be . and this would be a float . therefore , because the operationresults in a float at this point j is assigned the value of type float . now if we continue at some laterstage we take i and assign it to the value times j , since j was a float i now becomes float . in theinterpreter there is a useful function called type . so , if you type the word type and put an expressionand either a name or an expression in the bracket , it will tell you actually type of the expression . nowalthough python allows this feature of changing the type of value assigned to a name as the programevolves , this is not something that is recommended . because if you see an i and sometimes its a floatand sometimes its an int it is only confusing for you as a programmer and for the person trying tounderstand your code . the same way that we said before that we would like to organize our pythoncode so that we define all functions before we execute statements , it is a good idea to fix in advancein your mind at least , what different names stand for and stick to a consistent way of using theseeither as ints or as floats . let us execute some code and check that what we have been sayingactually happens . so , supposing we start the python interpreter and we say i is equal to , then if weuse this command type i it tells us type of i. so , it returns it in the form which is not exactlytransparent , but it says that i is of class int . so , you see the word int , if i say j is equal to point andi ask for the type of j then it will say j is of class float . so , the names int and floats are used internallyto signify the types of these expressions . now if i say i is equal to times j as we suggested i has avalue point , because j was a float and therefore , the multiplication resulted in a float and indeedif we ask for the type of i at this point it says that i is now a float . the point to keep in mind is that thename is themselves do not have fixed types they are not assigned types in advance . it depends onthe value that is currently stored in that name according to the last expression that was assigned .another important class of values that we use implicitly in all our functions are boolean values whichdesignate truth or falseness . so , there are two constants or two basic values of this type which inpython are called true with the capital t and false with the capital f . so , true is the value whichtells something is true . so , when we remember we wrote conditions like if something happens if x isequal to y do something , x mod is equal to something , to something in our gcd function . so , theoutput of such an expression where we compare something to another expression compare anexpression on the left to an expression on the right is to determine whether this comparisonssucceeds or fails when it succeeds it is true and when it fails it is false . these are implicitly used tocontrol the execution of our program . so , we need to have a way of recording these values andmanipulate it . the basic values are true or false and typically there are three functions which operateon these values . so , not negates the value . so , true is the opposite of false . so , not applied to truewill give us false not applied to false will give us true and follows the usually english meaning of andso , when we say that something is true and something else is true we mean that exactly both ofthem are true . so , x and y two values of boolean type will be the expression x and y will be trueprovided at the moment x has a value true and y also has a value true . if either of them is not truethen the output x and y is false . or again has an english meaning , but the meaning in computerscience and logic is slightly different from what we mean . so , normally when we say or we mean orthe other . so , you might say either i will wake up in time or i will miss my bus . so , what you will meanis that one of these two will happen it is unlikely that you mean that you will wake up in time andyou will miss your bus . it is when we use or in english we usually mean either the first thing willhappen or the second thing will happen , but not both , but in computer science and logic or is a so ,called inclusive or not exclusive , its not exclusively one will happen or the other , but inclusive bothmay happen . so , x or y is true if at least one is true . so , one of them must be true , but it also possiblewhen both are them true . the most frequent way in which we generate boolean values is throughcomparisons we have already seen the two of these . so , we have seen equal to equal to . this is theactual equality of mathematics not the single equal to which is the assignment . so , if x equal to equalto y checks , whether the value of x is actually the same as the value y and if so , it returns the valuetrue otherwise , it returns false . and the corresponding inequality operator is exclamation markfollowed . so , this is not equal to exclamation is equal to is a symbol for not equal to and this is theusual mathematical . and then of course you have for values which can be compared as smaller orlarger you have less than , greater than this is less than equal to and this is greater than equal to . so ,we have these logic logical comparison operators ' arithmetic comparison operators which yield alogical value true or false . and the usual thing we will do is combine these . so , we might want to saythat check if the reminder when divided by n is provided n is not . so , if we say n is greater thanand this it will require n to be number bigger than and the reminder n divided by n to be equal to. so , this says n is a multiple of n and n is not . and we can take an expression of this file kind ofcomparison , which yields as we said a boolean value , and take this boolean value and assign it to aname . so , we can say that n is a divisor of m if the reminder of m divided by n is equal to . and wecan say that the fact that it is a divisor its true provided this happens . so , divisor is now of type boolright and it has a value true or false depending or not whether or not n divides m evenly . let us lookat an example of how we would use boolean values . so , let us get back to the divides example . inmathematics we write m divides n to say that m is a divisor of n. so , this means that m times k isequal to n for some k. so , m divides n if the reminder of n divided by m is . if so you return true elseyou return false right . this is a very simple function it takes two arguments and checks if the firstargument divides the second argument . now what we can do is define an another function calledeven whose value is derived from here . so , we check whether two is a divisor of this number . so , wecheck whether divides n if divides n , then n is even , we return true if does not divide n , n isodd , we return false . so , similarly we could say define odd n else the negation of the previous case .so , if divides n then n is not odd . you take the answer about whether divides n or not , andreverse it to get the answer odd . so , if divides n , you negate it and say odd is false if does notdivide n , you get false back and you negate and say odd is true . so , we just wanted to emphasise thatboolean values can be computed , assigned , passed around just like numerical values are . tosummarise what we have seen is that the basic type of statement is to assign a name to a valuevalues have type and these determine what operations are allowed . so , we can use for instancearithmetic operations on numeric types , we can use logical operations like and , or , and not onboolean types , but the important difference between python and traditional languages where wedeclare names in advance is that python does not fix types for names . so , we can not say that ' i ' hasthe type int forever ' i ' will have a type depending on what it is assigned . a name inherits the typefrom its currently assigned value and its type can change as a program evolves depending on whatvalues have been assigned . what we have seen in this particular lecture are basic type int , floatand bool . as we go along this week , we will see more types with interesting structures andinteresting operations defined on them . we have seen now that python uses names to remembervalues . values are the actual quantities that we manipulate in our program , these are stored innames . values have types , and essentially the type of a value determines what operations areallowed . the types we have seen are the basic numeric types int and float , and the logical type boolwhich takes values true or false . so , for the numeric types , we have arithmetic operations , we alsohave other operations which are more complicated . for the boolean types we have and , or , not ,which allows us to manipulate true and false values . and then we have these comparison operatorsequal to , greater than and so on , which allows us to check the relative values of two differentquantities , and decide whether they are in some order with each other . the important thing that wesaid was that in python the names themselves do not have a fixed type . so , we can not say that i is oftype int or x is of type float , rather it depends on what values assigned and in particular , if a name isused for the first time without assigning a value then python will complain . we do not have toannounce names in advance like other programming languages , but whenever we first use a newname its first use must be in an assignment statement on the left hand side . so , before we use aname in an expression on the right hand side it must be assigned a valid value . numeric types by nomeans the only things that are of interest these days in computation . a lot of the computation we dois actually dealing with text . so , whenever we prepare a document , for example , using a wordprocessor or some other things for presentation , then we are actually manipulating text so we aremoving text around , searching for something to replace and so on . also when we are manipulatingdata itself , very often data comes from multiple sources . we might have tables of values which aretyped in by somebody or generated by a device and we have to import them in a spreadsheet . andthen if we want to manipulate them by using another program , we might want to export them froma spreadsheet this is typically done using text files in which the columns of the spreadsheet arestored in a systematic way separated by say commas . so , this also involves text processing . andfinally , most of us spend a time using a computer actually working with the internet . one of the mostcommon things we do when we use the internet is to type queries and look for matching documentsor other resources on the internet . so , most of this search query processing currently is done usingtext . it matches the text in the queries that we give with some information about the documents alsoimplicitly in text and decides which documents are most relevant to our query . so , text processing isan important part of computation in general . and the ease in which you can manipulate text inpython is one of the reasons why it has become a very popular language to program many thingsincluding internet applications . python uses the type string for text , which internally is called str . so ,we will use the word string instead of str , because it is easier to say . so , a string is basically sequenceof characters . unlike other programming languages , python does not have a specific character typeto distinguish a single character from a string of length . so , there is only one type for text inpython , which is string , and a single character is indistinguishable from a string of length . so , thereare not two types of things it is not that we have single characters and then string is a sequence ofcharacters , a string is sequence of symbols and one symbol is just a sequence of length . the valuesof this type are written as we would normally do in english using quotes . we use quotation marks todemarcate the beginning and at the end of a string when we want to write down an explicit value .so , we can use any type of quote , so a single quote would denote in this case the name city isassigned the string chennai . note that when we write symbols like this capital c is different fromsmall c and so on . so , we have seen exactly seen the symbols within these two quotes as the valueassigned to the string to the name city . now we can also use double quotes and one reason to usedouble quotes is if you actually need to use a single quote as part of the string . this is one way to doit and the other way to do it is actually to write a back slash . if you write a back slash and s quote inthe middle of the string , it means that this quote is to be taken as a symbol and not at the end of thestring , but a much simpler way to include special things like quotes inside other quotes is to changethe quotation . so , a single quote can include double quotes , and the double quote can include singlequote without any confusion . so , this says that the name title is assigned a value hitchhiker s guideto the galaxy . now , what if you wanted to combine both double quotes and single quotes in astring ? so , python has a very convenient thing called a triple quote . so , you can open three singlequotes , and then you can write whatever you want with multiple double quotes and single quotes .so , if you want to say he said his favorite book is within quotes hitchhiker s guide to the galaxy. then this value string has both double quotes inside it and it also has a single quote inside it . so ,we can not enclose it in double quotes and we can not enclose it in single quotes , because either ofthem will be ambiguous unless we use this back slash as i said before . so , if we do not want to useback slash , you can use a triple quote . let see how this works in python interpreter . so , we can say sequal to chennai and now been asked the value of this and we see that it is reported with singlequote . if we ask for the type of s , it says that s is class of str . so , this tells us that internally pythonrealizes that s is a string . if we say t is equal to say just the letter x , then the type of t is also a string .so , there is no distinction between single character and multiple characters . now if we say let us justshorten it say title is equal to hitchhiker s then if you ask for the value of title , it shows it to youwith double quotes outside and a single quote outside . so , this indicates that this is a single stringand again the type of title is str . and finally , if i say myquote is equal to and i use three quotes and iuse hitchhiker s . so , i have hitchhiker s in double quotes and hitchhiker s itself contains asingle quote . and i use triple quotes around it then my quote is correctly shown . now notice thatwhen it displays my quote , it does not show triple quotes . it includes puts another single quoteoutside and it shows this internal single quote has been highlighted with the back slash . so , backslash single quote is python 's way and many programming languages way of saying that the nextcharacter should not be treated as what it stands for , but as it is . so , just take the next single quote asa single quote , do not treat as the end of the quotation . the other thing that you can do with singlequote is to actually write multiple lines . so , i do this first line , and then second line , and then thirdline , and then close the quote then my quote is shown as first line with back slash n. so , back slashagain is a special character which indicates a new line then second line , then new line , and thenthird line . we said before that python is very useful for manipulating text and one other thing thatyou would like to do is actually read and say a paragraph of text or multiple lines of a document andnot have to worry about the fact that these are multiple lines just store it as a text value as a string .this is very much possible in python you can embed multiple lines of text into a single value . as wesaid the string is a sequence or a list of characters . so , how do we get to individual characters in thislist ? well , these characters have positions and in python positions in a string start with . so , if i haven characters in a string , the positions are named to n minus . so , supposing we have a string hello ,it has characters . so , the positions in the string will be called , , , and so this is how we labelpositions . and another convenience in python is that we can actually label it backwards . we can saythat this is position minus very often you want to say take the last character of a string and dosomething . so , instead of having to remember the length and then go to the end , it is convenient tosay take the last character . so , take the minus th character . so , we actually saw this and we did thegcd , we talked about the last element of the list say the list of common characters , and we said theminus th element n the list is the last element . this numbering scheme that we use for listinformally in the gcd example without formally explaining , it is actually the same numbering schemethat is used for positions in the string . we have minus , minus , minus , minus , minus , so theimportant thing to remember is that going forward , you start at , and coming backward you start atminus , because obviously , minus is same as . so , if we use minus for the right most thing therewould be terrible confusion as to whether we are talking about the first value or the last value . so ,the forward position start from from the beginning and the reverse position start from minusfrom the last element . once we have this then we can see that we use this square bracket notationto extract individual positions . so , s , so that is the character at position is an e and if i walkbackwards then s minus is an l. one of the most basic things one can do with strings is to put themtogether to combine two values into a larger string and this is called concatenation putting themone after the other . and the operator that is used for this is plus . so , plus , we saw for numeric valuesadd them for strings the same symbol plus does not add strings obviously , it does not make senseto add strings , but it juxtaposes them , puts them one after the other . so , if we have a string hello aswe did before , and we take this , and we take a new string and we add it to s. then we get a string t ,whose value is the part that was in hello plus the part that was added . so , plus is just the simpleoperator which takes two strings and sticks them side by side . let us look at an example in theinterpreter . just to emphasize one point supposing i said s was hello and t was there , then s plus twould be the value hello there . now notice that there is no space . so , plus literally puts s followed byt , it does not introduce punctuation , any separation , any space and this is as you would like it . if youwant to put a comma or a space you must do that , so if you say t instead of that was space there t isthe string consisting of blank space followed by there , now if i say s plus t , i get a space betweenhello and there . this is important to note that plus directly puts things together it does not add anypunctuation or any separation between the two values . so , it is as though you have one new stringwhich is composed of many old strings whose boundaries disappear completely . we can get lengthof the string using the function len . so , len s returns the length of s. so , this is the number ofcharacters . so , remember that if the number of characters is n then the positions are to n minus .so , the length of the string s here would be , the length of the string t here would be plus .there are many other interesting functions that one can use to manipulate strings , you can searchand replace things , you can find the first occurrence of something and so on , and we will see some ofthese later on , when we get into strings and text processing and reading data from files in moredetails . a very common thing that we want to do with strings is to extract the part of a string . wemight want to extract the beginning , the first word and things like that . the most simple way to dothis in python is to take what is called a slice . slice is a segment , a segment means i take a long stringwhich i can think of as a list of character and i want the portion from some starting point to someending point . this is what python calls a slice . so , if we say s is hello as before , then for a slice we givethis starting point and the ending point separated by colon . so , we use this square bracket notationexactly as though we were extracting part of a string , but the part that we are extracting is not thesingle position , but a range of positions from to . now in python , we saw that we had this rangefunction which we wrote last time , it said things like , if i want the numbers from to m , i must writeto m plus , because the range function in python stops one position short of the last element ofthe range . so , in the same way , a slice stops one position short of the last index in the slice . so , if i dothis then remember that hello has position , , , , , so the slice from to starts at goes to ,goes to , but does not go to , so it is only from e to l the second l. in general , if i write s i colon jthen it starts at s i and ends at s j minus . there are some shortcuts which are easy to rememberand use very often you want to take the first n characters in the string , then you could omit the ,and just say start implicitly from , so just leave it out , so just start say colon and j. so this will give usall position up to j minus . so , if i leave out first position , it is implicitly starting from . similarly ,if i leave out the last position it runs to the end of the string . so , if i want everything from i onwardsthen i can say s i colon and this will go up to the position length of s minus , but if i write explicitlyas a slice , i will only write length of s. so , essentially this is the main reason that python has thisconvention that whenever i write something like a range of to m plus then i have this extra plushere . so , the main reason for this plus here is to avoid having to write minus . if i had to includethe last character and if i start numbering at , then every time i wanted to go to the end of thestring i would have to say length of s minus . it is much more convenient to just say length of s , andimplicitly assume that it knows that it should not go to length of s , but length of s minus . so , thiswhole confusion if you would like to call that in python about that fact that all ranges end one shortof the right hand side of the range , stems from the fact that you very often want to run fromsomething to the length of it in a list or a sequence or a string and when you say that you do notwant have keep remembering to say minus . let us play with the second in the python interpreter .so , if i say s is equal to hello then we saw that if i do to , i get 'ell ' . if i say colon then i get 'hel 'that is . if i say colon , i get 'llo ' that is . what if i say , so this says start at positionand go up to position minus which is . so , python does not give you an error , it takes all theseinvalid ranges , anything where for example , the starting point to the ending point does not define avalid range , and it says this is the empty string . on the other hand , if i say something like go from to, where there is no th position in the string , here python will not give an error instead , it will justgo up to the last position which actually exists in the string below . so , in general these range valuesare treated in a sensible way , if you give values which do not make sense . as far as possible pythontries to do something sensible with the slice definition . though we have access to individualpositions or individual slices or sequences within a string , we can not take a part of a string andchange it as it stands . so , we can not update a string in place . suppose , we want to take our stringhello and change it to the string help ! it would be nice if we could take the third and the fourthposition . so , remember , , , , , , so , , , , , so it would be nice if we could say make thisinto a p and make this into an exclamation mark , so that i could get help instead of hello . we wouldwant to write something like change s , assign the value s to be the string p. now , unfortunatelypython does not allow this . so , you can not update a string in place by changing its part . in fact , if youtry this , you will actually get an error message , let us see . here we have the string hello defined infour , and if i now try to say s is equal to p , then it says this does not support item assignment ,which is what we are trying to say you can not change parts of a string as it stands . instead of doingthis , instead of trying to take a string and change the part of it as its stands what you need to do isactually construct a new string effectively using the notion of slices and concatenation . here what wewant to do is we want to take the first part of the string as it is . these are the first three characters ,and then we want to change this to p exclamation mark . so , what we can say is update s by taking ,, which is slice to and concatenating it with the new string p exclamation mark . so , this is howyou modify strings in python , but important thing is this is a new s we are not claiming that this s issame as old s. there we build a new string from the old string and perhaps store it back in the samename , it is partly like when we say j is equal to j plus , we are actually saying that we have created anew value for j and stored it back in j. here again we are creating a new string and putting it back ,but we are not modifying it . now this distinction between modifying and creating a new value maynot seem very important at this moment , but it will become important as we go along . so , strings arewhat are called immutable values , you can not change them without actually creating a fresh valuewhereas , lists as we will see which are more general type of sequence can be changed in place youcan take one part of a list and then replace it by something else . so , we will see more about this later ,this is a fairly important concept . remember for now that strings can not be changed in place . tosummarize what we have seen is that text values are important for computation , and python has thetypes string or str , which is a sequence of characters to denote text values . and there is nodistinction for a separate type for a single character there is no single character type in python , asingle character is just a string of a length . we can extract individual characters by index positions ,we can use slices to extract sub strings , and we can glue strings together using the concatenationoperator plus , but strings are immutable . we can not take a value assigned to a string name andupdate it in place . we can create a new value by manipulating it using slices and concatenation , butwe can not directly update it , because strings are immutable . for our final lecture of this first week ,we will see how to actually use python on our system . python is a programming language , which isavailable on all platforms . so , whether you are working on linux or on a mac or on windows , you willbe able to find a version of python that works on your system . one of the small complications withpython is that there are two flavors or two versions of python , which are commonly found . so , thereis an older version called python . , and there is a newer version called python . python is a onethat is being actively developed , python . is more or less a static version and currently pythonhas the version . . or something like that . so , there is not much difference whether you are using. or . , but there are difference between . and . and for the purpose of this course , we willwork with python . what is the difference between these two versions ? well , python began with afew features and it kept developing into more versatile programming language . so , python wentthrough much iteration and python . was a version that was reached when the developers ofpython decided that there should kind of make a clean start . and some of the new features whichhad been added in and ad hoc way on to the language should be integrated in a better way whichmakes it a more robust programming language . python essentially is a modern version of python ,which incorporates features that where added on to python as it group in a way that makes it moreconsistent and more easy to use , but as often happens a lot of people had already been usingpython , and python . has a lot of software written using that version . in particular a lot of softwarethat people find convenient to use such as scientific and statistical libraries of functions where theydo not have to use it themselves , they 'll just invoke these libraries are still written using python . .and if you run it from python sometimes these functions do not work as they are expected . so , thishas forced python . to live on . eventually we hope that somebody will take the effort to movepython . libraries to python . and of course , newer code is largely being developed on python ,but you should remember that when somebody says that they are using python they could be talkingabout . and not , and you have to make adjustments . for the purpose of the introductorymaterial that we will be doing in the course , there is almost no change between python and python. however , there are some features that we will see which are slightly different in . and we willexplore them in , and i will try to highlight these differences as we go long . but going forward inpython is the current version and it has been the current version for some years now at least foror years . it is definitely the language , which is going to dominate in the future , so it is better thatyou start with a new version then go back to the old version . as far as this course is concerned , anyversion of python should be fine . the latest version as i said is some . .x , where i thing x is , butif you do not have . , but you have . or . do not bother everything should work fine . but if youare interested , you can install the latest , latest version . if you are using linux , it should normally bethere by default because many linux utilities require python and so python should be on you aresystem , but it could be that the utility is use python . . so , make sure that you install python . youcan use the package manager to do this . now if you are using a mac or you are using windows thenpython may or may not be installed especially python may not be installed on your system . there isthe url given here . if you search on google , you will find it . just search for python . install ordownload and you will get to this url . so , www.python.org downloads release python . , isreally refer into . . . so , actually the current version as i said is not . . , but . . . so , you will findinstructions there please download the version that is appropriate for your system and install it .these are designed to be fairly self explanatory install files if you have a problem please searchonline for help with the problem you are facing or ask someone around you . it is not the purpose ofthis course to spend a lot of time telling you how to install software . so , i hope you are able to dothis , so that we can get ahead with the actual programming part . one more thing to keep in mind , ifyou are familiar with other programming languages , is the distinction between interpreters andcompilers . so , the main difficultly is that programming languages like python or c or c or java arewritten for us to understand and write instructions on . so , these are somewhat high levelinstructions . in the other hand , computers need low level instructions . so , when we talk aboutnames and values like i , j or we talk about list , the underline computer may not be able to directlyanalyze these things , so we need a translation . if you remember the very first lecture , we talkedabout arranging chairs . so , we said arrange the chairs as a high level thing , and we said put charsin in rows , each right . we said that they could be a difference in the level of detail in whichyou give instructions and this is precisely what happens . in order to execute something so calledexecutable file that we come across we something which is return at a level that the machine canunderstand . whereas , the programs that we are going to explore on this course and which allprogrammers normally work with are at a higher level , which can not be directly understood bycomputer , so we have to bridge this gaps somehow . a compiler is a program which takes a high levelprogramming language and translates programs on that language to a machine level programminglanguage . so , it takes the high level program in python , if in not python , in c or c or java orsomething and produces something with directly a machine can execute . in the other hand , theother way of dealing with the highlevel language is to interpret it . so , an interpreter in normallyenglish is somebody who stands between people talking different languages and translates back andforth . an interpreter is a program which you interact with , and you feed the interpreter instructionsin your language , in this case python and the interpreter internally figures out how to run them onthe underline machine . so , whether you are running it on windows , or mac , or linux interpreterguarantees that the answer that you see at the high level looks approximately the same independentof the actual platform on which you are running it . so , python is by and large an interpreted languageand we should be aware of this fact . we use python typically in the following way we first run theinterpreters . so , remember interpreter is the program . we first invoke the interpreter and when theinterpreter is running , we pass python commands to the interpreter to be executed . the nice thingabout dealing with an interpreter is that you can play with it like you play with a calculator you canfeed it commands and see what it does , so it is very interactive . of course , it is tedious , if you have totype in large programs , so there is a way to load a program which has been written already using astandard text editor and loading it from a file . so , what i have shown below in green is so this is whatwe will see in a minute is the prompt that the interpreter shows you . when you enter theinterpreter , it will ask you to execute a command and this is a command that you provide theinterpreter . it says . so , i have stored . i have a file called say file name dot p y typically to indicate it isa python program from that file import all the definitions and functions and code that is writtenthere . so , this will tell the interpreter to take everything that is written in that code and put it into itscurrent environment , so that those functions can be used . so , these things will become a little clearand then in the demo that i am just going to show you and then you can play around with this . andthen the next week , we will get into the real details about exactly what goes into a python program .here is a window showing the terminal which on windows would be like a command prompt andusing unique like shell . so , if i say ls , it shows me the list of files in my current area . and all this fileswith extension dot p y are actually python programs . in this , i invoke the python interpreter by sayingpython . because that is the version which i am using . if i invoke it , it will produce some messagestelling me what type of function system i 'm on . so , it tells me that i am using for instance . . and ithas may that it is a fairly recent version , it tells me that it is on a apple and blah blah blah , but whatis important is then produces a prompt place where i can enter commands and this is signified bythese three greater times . now , at the python interpreter prompt , you can directly start writingthings . so , for example , you can say i is equal to . what it says as a take a name i assign to value of .now if i type i , it tells me that the value is if i type an expression like i plus , it tells me that is .so , you can use it as a calculator . so , you can do simple arithmetic if you want . so , you can keepinteracting with it . now , you can also define functions remember how we defined a function , we usedef , use a function name and so on . so , we can say for example , def twice x. this is the functiontwice , this takes the single argument x. and as you might expect i would like to return two times x .now a python uses as we mentioned in one of the earlier lectures , indentation in order to specifythat something is a part of something else . so , the definition consists of a bunch of it steps . so , imust tell it that these bunches of steps belong to this definition by indenting it it does not matterhow you indent it as long as you use the same indentation uniformly . if you are using two spaces , usetwo spaces use a tab , but do not mix up the number of spaces and do not mix up tabs and spaces ,because this gets you confuse the error messages form python . so , let us use two spaces . let us tothe sake of illustration create a new name y , and say y is two times x. now it is still continuing to askme for the definitions , so the prompt has change to dot dot dot . now i must induct it a same wayand say return y. so , what i have done is i say this function takes in value x , computes two times x ,and stores it in the name y , and returns the value of the name y , right . now , when i am done withthis , i give a blank line and this function is now defined . now , twice makes sense , what twicewill also make sense right . so , python is very convenient in that you can have few define functions asyou go along on the fly . now , we could also define our gcd right here , but as you might expectsometimes a function is too complicated to typing without make in a mistake , and secondly , youmight want to play around with the function and change it and not have to keep typing it again andagain . for this , what we need to do is first type the function in to a file and then load the file here .let us get out of this . so , one way to get out of this is to type quit the brackets . and then you getback to this prompt which is dollar which is the outside terminal or the command prompt . so , i haveactually already created something . let us start with , so i use an editor called emacs , you can use anytakes editor if you are using windows , you can use notepad , if you are using and linux , you can useemacs or vi or you can use some simpler editor like gedit or k , anything that is comfortable , but itshould just be a text editor it should not do any formatting , do not use word processes like you knowoffice or something like that . you something we just manipulates text files . if i look at gcd dot py , soone nice thing what emac is it shows me colors to indicate certain things . so , def this is the very firstgcd program we wrote , which takes computes the list f m then the list f m then the list cf , and then itreturns the last elements in cf . so , this is the first version of gcd . so , this is the exactly the code wewrote before . the point to remember is that i have made sure that all these indentations are at thesame number of spaces in . so , this is something to remember . now , you typing something like thisright then you save it and exit . now you go back to your python , and you save from that file gcdimport star what this means is take the file gcd dot py and load all the functions which had definedthere and make them available to me here . now , if i say gcd of comma let us for example , andfor instance , it tells me the gcd . now if you take some large number like and then ittakes , so may be one more digit let us see , you will notice that it is not giving me an answer and thenit gives me answer . so , it this is just to illustrate that this was the slow gcd right . so , see how muchtime it took . it has the visible gap of a few seconds before it produces the answer . and this is theillustration that this is not a very efficiency gcd . so , one of the problems with this python interpreterwhich i will see if we can solve is that if i have already loaded one file then it is safer to exit and thenreload other file rather than to update the file . let me reload for instance the last version of euclid 'sthing , which we wrote which is the reminder version . it says that if m less then n exchange the valuesif then the second line here says that if the reminder of m divided by n is that is n is a divisor of mthen return n otherwise replace the g c d call by the call to n and its reminder . so , this we also had aversion of this where we return to the while loop . let us use the while version . the while version saysthat so long as the reminder is not , we keep updating m and n to n and the reminder , and finallyyou return the value of n. i am going to take this particular thing and load it into python . so , again ifirst invoke the interpreter python then i say from gcdeuclid a import star . now i am going to givethat same large value that we saw before and which i think was say and . and nowyou see , you get an instant answer . in fact , you will see that if i even if i give it several more digits , itshould hope fully work fast . so , there is a dramatic improvement in speed which is even visible in thissimple example , if we replace the naive idea by a clever idea . the power of algorithm is to actuallymake a program which would otherwise be hopelessly slow work at a speed which is acceptable toyou . do a load python on your system , invoke the python interpreter and play around with the codethat we have seen in this particular week 's thing , make errors see what python tells you when youimport a file which has errors . for instance now if i try to ah invoke a function which does not existslike , if i use a function which i have not defined and which python does not understand then it willgive me a mistake like this . it will say loop is not defined . if i write something strange like less thangreater than , then it will say that this is invalid syntax . the interpreter will look for an expression ifthe expressions do not make sense then it is going to complain . and sometimes the error messagesare easy to understand , sometime they are less easy to understand as we go along we will look intothis . but , the purpose of the interpreter is to either execute what you have given it or tell you thatwhat you have written is somehow not executable and explains why . so , do play around with it and aget some familiarity because this is what going to be our bread and butter as we go along . we aregoing to be looking at some specific features of python in this course , but you may find as we goalong that there is something that you do not understand or something new that you would like totry out your own . so , it is always a good idea to have access to other resources . the python onlinedocumentation is actually an excellent place to look for details about python and in particular , thereis a very readable tutorial especially , if you already have some familiarity with programming thepython is probably the best place to start learning python for yourself . so , here is a url ,docs.python.org this is for python tutorial index dot html . if you just go to docs.python.org ,you will find there are also more detailed reference manuals and so on , which you might need at alater stage . do keep this as one of the places that you look when you have difficulties . and there aretwo books which probably useful to understand python beyond what is covered in the lectures if youfeel that something is not clear . so , there is this book called dive into python which is adapted forpython . and there is book called think python which is about generally about computationalthinking in the context of python . both of these have the nice advantage that they are availableonline , so you do not have a buy anything you can just browse them through your browser on thenet . before we leave you for this week , remember that learning programming is an activity youcan not learn programming theoretically . you have to write and execute code to appreciate thesubject . you have to make mistakes learn from your mistakes figure out what works , what does notwork and only then will you get a true appreciation for programming . reason we are going withpython is because python has a very simple syntax compared to other programming languages . wehave already without formally learning python , seen some fairly sophisticated programs for gcd andhopefully you have understood them even if you can not generate them . it is not very difficult toexplain what a python program is doing with a little bit of understanding . do take the time topractice the examples that we had seen this time . we will be giving programming exercises as we goalong and unless you do these exercises and become somewhat handy at manipulating pythonyourself , you will never truly learn both programming and python . the other thing to remember isthat once you have learned one language , even though the features and the syntax vary fromlanguage to language , it is very easy to pick up a another language , because all of programming hasat it is base very similar principles . although the syntax may vary , the ideas do not . the ideas areeventually what write the program , but to be a fluent speaker of a programming language , you mustpractice it . so , do try . let us continue with our running example of gcd to explore more issuesinvolved with program . we started with the basic definition of gcd , which said that we should firstcompute all the factors of m , store it in a list , compute all the factors of n , store it in another list ,from these two lists , extract the list of common factors and report the largest one in this commonfactor list . our first simplification was to observe that we can actually do a single pass from to theminimum of m and n and directly compute the list of common factors without first separatelycomputing the factors on m and the factors of n. we then observe that we don t even need this listof common factors since our interest is only in the greatest common factor or the greatest commondivisor . so , we may as well just keep track of the largest common factor we have seen so far in asingle name and report it at the end . our final simplification was to observe that if we are interestedin the largest common factor , we should start at the end and not the beginning . so , instead ofstarting from and working upwards to the minimum of m and n its better to start with minimum ofm and n and work backwards to one , and as soon as we find a common factor we report it and exit .remember always that is guaranteed to be a common factor . so when we start from minimum of mand n and go backwards , if we don t see any other common factor , we are still guaranteed that wewill exit correctly when we hit one . so what we notice that was , that though these different versionsare simpler than the earlier versions they all have the same efficiency in terms of computation , whichis that they will force us in the worst case to run through all the numbers between and theminimum of m and n , before we find the greatest common factor whether we work forwards orbackwards . so at the time of the ancients greeks , what was possibly the first algorithm in modemterminology was discovered by euclid , and that was for this problem gcd . so what euclid said wasthe following . suppose we have a divisor d which divides both m and n , so this is a common divisorand we are looking for the largest such d. let us assume also for the sake of argument that m isgreater than n. so if d divides both m and n , we can write m as a times d and n as b times d for somevalues a and b , so m is multiple of d and so is n. so if we subtract the equations then the left handside is m minus n. so , we take m and subtract n from m , so correspondingly we subtract b d from a d .so , m minus n is equal to a d minus b d , but since d is a common term this means m minus n is aminus b times d. this is where we are using the assumption that m is greater than n , so a minus bwill be a positive number . but the important thing to note is that m minus n is also a multiple of d. inother words , if d divides both m and n , it also divides m minus n. and since d is the largest divisor ofm and n , it will turn out that d is also the largest divisor which is common to m , n and m minus n. inother words , the gcd of m and n is the same as the gcd of the smaller of the two , namely n and thedifference of the two m and n , m minus n. so , we can use this to drastically simplify the process offinding the gcd . so here is the first version of euclid s algorithm . so , consider the value gcd of m nassuming that m is greater than n. so if n is already a divisor of m , then we are done and we return n .otherwise , we transform the problem into a new one and instead of computing the gcd of m and nthat we started with , we compute the gcd of n and m minus n and return that value instead . so , hereis a python implementation of this idea . there are a couple of new features that are introduced here ,so let us look at them . the first is this special statement which starts with symbol hash . so in python ,this kind of a statement is called a comment . so a comment is a statement that you put into aprogram to explain what is going on to a person reading the program , but it is ignored by thecomputer executing the program . so , this statement says that we are assuming that m is bigger thanor equal to n. so , this tells us that when the program continues this is the assumption . of course , it ispossible that the person who invokes gcd does not realize this , so they might invoke it with m smallerthan n and so we fix it . this is a special kind of assignment which is peculiar to python it is notpresent in most other programming languages . so what we want to do is , basically we want to takethe values m and n and we want to exchange them , right . we want to make the new value of m , theold value of n and the new value of n , the old value of m , so that in case m and n were in the wrongorder we reverse them . so , what this python statement does is it takes a pair of values and it does asimultaneous assignment so it says that the value of n goes into the value of m and the value of mgoes into the value of n. now it is important that it is simultaneous , because if you do it in eitherorder , if you first copy the value of n into m , then the old value of n is lost . so , you can not copy theold value of m into the new value of n because you have lost it . so imagine that you have two mugsof water , and now you want to exchange their contents . now you have to make space , you can notpour this into that without getting rid of that and once you got rid of that you can not pour that intothat , so you need third mug normally . you need to first transfer this here and keep it safe , and thenyou need to transfer this there and then you need to copy it back . so this is the normal way thatmost programming languages would ask you to exchange two values , but python has this niftyfeature by which you can take a pair of values and simultaneously update them and in particularlythis simultaneous update allows us to exchange the values without worrying about having this extratemporary place to park one value . anyway , all that this first part is doing is to ensure that thiscondition that we have assumed is satisfied . so now we come to the crux of the algorithm . if mdivides n that is remainder of m divided by n is then we have found n to be the gcd and we returnn. if this is not the case , then we go back to what we discovered in the last slide and we now aregoing to compute gcd of n and the difference m minus n. we would ideally like to compute gcd of nand m minus n. so , we compute the difference m minus n and we could just invoke this . but , it ispossible , for example if m is say and n is then the difference will be . the difference couldvery well be larger than n , and we would ideally like to call this function with the first number biggerthan the larger number . so we will just ensure this even though our function does take care of this .what we want to do is , we want to call gcd with n and m minus n instead we will call gcd with themaximum value of n and the difference as a first argument and the minimum value of n and thedifference . so it will make sure that the bigger of the two values goes first and the smaller of the twovalues go . and whatever this gcd , the new gcd returns is what this function will return . this is anexample of what we will see later , which is quite natural , which is called recursion . recursion means ,that we are going to solve this problem by solving the smaller problem and using that answer in thiscase directly to report the answer for our current problem . so we want to solve the gcd of m and n ,but the gcd of m and n instead we solve the gcd n and m minus n and whatever answer that gives uswe directly report it back as the gcd for this , so we just invoke the function with the smaller valuesand then we return it . now whenever you do a recursive call like this , it is like a while loop it willinvoke the function again , that in turn will invoke a smaller function and so on . and you have to makesure that this sequence in which gcd keeps calling gcd with different values does not get to an infiniteprogression without a stopping point . so , formally what we have to ensure is that this guarantee offinding an n which divides m , so this is where gcd actually exits without calling itself . we have tomake sure that eventually we will reach this point . now what is happening if you see here is that thevalues that are passed to gcd are getting smaller and smaller . now what can we have for m minus n ?what can be the value ? can it be ? well , if m minus n is that means m is equal to n , if m is equalto n then certainly m is divisible by n. if m minus n is then it could have exited , so it can not be . itmust be at least , so whenever we call this function m minus n it s at least one . on the other handeach time we are reaching smaller values . so , we start with some value and m minus n keepsdecreasing . what happens when it actually reaches ? well , when it reaches then divides everyother number , so m percent n or m divided by n , the remainder will be , so we will return gcd of .in other words , we had guaranteed that this function because it keeps reducing the number that weinvoke the function with will eventually produce a call where gcd terminates . this is important andwe will come back to this later but whenever you write a function like this , you have to make surethat there is a base case which will be reached in a finite number of steps no matter where you start .this is euclid s algorithm , the first version where we observe that the gcd of m and n can be replacedby the gcd n and m minus n. and what we have seen in this particular implementation are threethings rather , we have seen how to put a comment in our code , we have seen that python allows thiskind of simultaneous updation of two variables at the same time so m comma n equal to n commam. we have also seen that we can use the same function with new arguments in order to computethe current functions . so there is no problem with saying that in order to compute gcd of m and n , iwell instead compute gcd 's on some other value and use that answer to return my answer . let uslook at a different version of this algorithm , where we replace the recursive call by a while loop . wesaw while in our last version of this standard algorithm when we were counting down from minimumof m comma n to , so we kept checking whether i was greater than and we kept decrementing .well , here we are doing the recursion using a while , so the first thing to notice here is that i havemoved this comment which used to be in a separate line to the end of the line . what python says isthat , if there is hash then the rest of the line can be ignored . so , it reads this line it sees a validcondition and then sees the hash , so it s as though this statement was not part of the pythonprogram when it is executed . comment can either be in a separate line or it can be in end of a line .of course , remember that you can not put anything after this which you want python to executebecause once it sees a hash the rest of the line is going to be ignored , so it can not be in middle of aline you can not put a comment in middle of a line , but you can put it on separate line or you can putit at end of the line . so anyway so this is our comment as before . so up to here there is no changeexcept that i have shifted the comment position . now we reach this point where we actually have todo some computation . at this point if we have found n such that n divides m we are done and we candirectly return n. so , this is what our recursive code would do . if we have not found such an n wehave to do some work . the condition is to check whether m divided by n actually produces aremainder . so , this not equal to symbol is return with this exclamation mark , so this is the same asthe mathematical not equal to . remember that this double equal to was what we use for themathematical symbol of equality . this is our symbol for not equal to . so , so long as there isremainder , that is the remainder m divided by n is not we do what we did before we compute thedifference and we replace m by the maximum of the two values and n by the smaller of the twovalues . we have a pair m n whose gcd we are trying to find right , with assumption that m is biggerthan n at each step we replace m by the larger of n and the difference and n by the smaller of n andthe difference . this exactly what we are doing in the recursive call , we are saying pretend we arecomputing gcd of that . here in this while loop effectively we are saying replace the gcd of m n by thecomputation of maximum n diff and minimum n diff . we keep doing this until we hit a conditionwhere n actually divides m , and exactly like we said in the recursive case that there will be aboundary case where at worst case n will become and will divide everything . in the same wayhere the difference will keep reducing , the difference can not be , because if difference is it couldhave divided , so difference can at most go down to and when it hits one we are done . this a whileversion of the same recursive function we wrote earlier , so if it helps you can look at these side byside and try to understand what this recursive things is doing and what the while is doing and seethat they are basically doing the same thing . and the idea that the recursion must terminate isexactly analogous to the claim that we said earlier that when you write a while you must make surethat you make progress towards making the while condition false , so that the while exits . so , just likethe recursion can go on forever , if you are not careful and you do not invoke it with arguments whichguarantee termination , the while can also go on forever if you do not make progress within the whilein order to make sure that the while condition eventually becomes false . we can actually do a littlebetter than this . let us see one problem with this by doing a hand execution . so supposing we startwith some number like gcd of and , then our algorithm will say that this should now becomegcd of the difference and n , the difference is so will have and , and then this will become gcdof and and so on . so , we will keep doing this about steps then eventually we will come downto gcd of and , and then gcd of and . now when we compute the difference we get gcd of and, so now the difference will become smaller . then at this point we will report that the answer is .so , it actually takes us about steps in order to do gcd of into . one of our criticisms of naiveapproach is that it takes time proportional to the numbers themselves . if you had numbers m and nwe would take in general number of steps equal to minimum of m and n. now here , in fact we aretaking steps larger than the minimum because the minimum is , if you were just computing factorswe will see that the only factor of is and it is not a factor we would have stopped right atbeginning . this actually seems to be worst then our earlier algorithm in certain cases . here is abetter observation suppose n does not divide m. in other words if i divide m by n i will get a quotientand a remainder . so , i can write n as q times n plus r where q is quotient and r is the remainder , soyou may remember these terms from high school arithmetic . n goes into n q times and leaves aremainder r and we are guaranteed that r is smaller than n , otherwise r it could go one more time itwill become q plus . we have the remainder r which is smaller than n. so for example if i say and iwant to divide it by for example , this will be times plus , so this will be my quotient and thiswill be my remainder . and the important thing is remainder is always smaller than what i am dividingby . now , let us assume as before that we have a common divisor for both m and n. in other wordslike before we can write m itself as a times d and n as b times d for some numbers a and b , becausem is is multiple of d and so is n. if you plug this into the equation above here , then we see that mwhich is a times d is equal to q times n which is b times d plus r. so , d divides the left and d dividesone part of the right . you can easily convince yourself that d must also divide r. the way to thinkabout it if you want to pictorially is that i have this number m and i can break it up into units of n andthen there is a small bit here . on the other hand if i look at d , d evenly divides everything . so itdivides each of these blocks it also divides the whole thing . if i continue with d , it is going to stopexactly at this boundary because d also divides n , therefore d must also divide this last bit which is rexactly . in other words , we can argue very easily that r must also be a multiple of d. so d must divider as well . if d divides m and b divides n then d must divide the remainder of m divided by n. and aswe saw before with the difference , the last time we said we would look at the difference m dividedby n. now we are saying we look at the remainder of m divided by n and d must divide that and d willbe in fact the gcd of n and this remainder . this is an improved and this is the actual version of thealgorithm that euclid proposed , not the difference one but the remainder one . it says consider thegcd of m and n assuming that m is bigger them n. now if n divides m we are done we just return n ,this is the same as before . otherwise , let r be the remainder with the value of m divided by n get theremainder and return the gcd of n and r , and at this point one important thing to remember is that ris definitely less than n. so we do not have to worry about this condition here , we do not have totake the max and the min as we did for the difference because the remainder is guaranteed to beless than n otherwise n would go one more time . as before we have very simple recursiveimplementation of this , and this is even simpler because we do not have to do this max min business .so , like the previous time we first flip m and n in case they are not in the right order . then if n dividesm if the remainder of m divided by n is we return n and we are done , otherwise we return the gcdof n and the remainder , so this is the remainder . and remember that the remainder is always lessthan n so we do not have to worry about flipping it and taking max and min at this point . andanalogous tp the previous case we can do this whole thing using a while instead of doing it withrecursive thing . we first exchange m and n if they are in the wrong order , then so long as theremainder is not we replace m by the smaller of the two numbers and we replace n by theremainder and we proceed . now we are guaranteed that this remainder will either go to , but if itgoes to it means it divides or if it s not in the worst case the remainder keeps decreasing becauseit is always smaller than the number that we started with . so it keeps decreasing and it reachesthen in the next step it will divide . so finally , we will return at least one . if we go back to the examplethat we were looking at , so if we saw that gcd , , and we did it using the difference we said wetook about steps . now here if we do the remainder i am going to directly find that r is equal toright if i divide by it goes times remainder . in one step i will go to gcd comma and i willget . in fact , what you can show is that this version with the remainder actually takes timeproportional to number of digits , so if i have say hundred digit number it will take about a hundredsteps . so for instance if we have a billion as our number , so billion will have about to the willhave about ten digits . then if i do the naive algorithm then it could take some constant times ofbillion numbers of steps say a billion steps . but this algorithm because of the claim it takes timeproportional to number of digits since to the has approximately digits it will only take aboutsteps , so there is a dramatic improvement in efficiency in this version . this is something that wewill touch up on while we are doing this course . this course is about programming , data structuresand algorithms . so the programming part talks about what is the best way to express a given idea ina program in a way that it is easy to make sure that it is correct and easy to read and maintain , sothat is the programming part . how do you write , how do you express your ideas in the most clearfashion . but the idea itself has to be clear and that is where data structures and algorithm start . soyou might write beautiful prose , but you may have no ideas or you may have very brilliant ideas butyou may express yourselves clumsily , neither of them is optimal . this is like writing in any otherlanguage . you may have brilliant ideas to express , but if you can not convey them to the person youare talking to the ideas lose their impact . so , you need ideas and you need a language to expressthem . programming is about expressing these ideas , but the ideas themselves come from algorithmsand data structures . in the first lecture we used gcd as an example to introduce some basic conceptsin programming . we will continue to look at the same example and see how to refine our programand explore new ideas . here was our basic algorithm for gcd , which as we said more or less followsthe definition of the function . we construct two lists of factors for the inputs m and n. so , weconstruct fm the factors of m , fn the factors of n , and then from these we compute cf the list offactors in both lists or common factors . our goal is to return the greatest common divisor of thelargest number in this common list which happens to be the last one in this list , since we add thesefactors in ascending order . so can we do better than this ? the way we have proceeded , we first scanall numbers from to m to compute the list fm of factors of m , and then we again start from to n tocompute fn . so , an obvious improvement is to just directly scan the numbers from to the larger ofm and n and in one scan compute list fm and fn . in another words for each i in this list to themaximum of m and n we first check if i divides m , if so we add it to the list of factors of m , and thenwe check if i divides n and if so we add it to list fn . instead of doing two separate scans over to mand then to n and repeating the past we do it in one scan . but even this can be improved upon . ifwe are doing it in one pass and we are checking if numbers divide both m and n , then why not wejust directly check for common factors . in another words instead of computing two lists and thencombining them we can just directly do the following for each i from to the maximum of m and n ,if i divides both m and n then we directly add i to the list of common factors . if it divides neither or ifit divides only one of them then it is not a common factor and we can discard . in fact , notice thatrather than going to the maximum of m and n we should go to the minimum of m and n , becauseonce we cross the smaller number we will not get a factor for the smaller number . remember thatthe factors of m lie between and m and for n lie between and n. if m is smaller than n forexample , if we input m plus though it made a factor of n it certainly can not be a factor of m. so ourbetter strategy is for each i in the range to the minimum of m , and n if i divides both m and n thenwe add i to the list of common factors . here is a much shorter python program implementing thisnew strategy . so instead of computing the lists fm and fn we directly compute the list of commonfactors . we let i range from to the minimum of m plus m and n and remember that python requiresus to give the limit of the range is one more than the limit we want to go up to , so we go from tothe minimum m n plus . and now we have an extra connective it is called a logical connective andwhich says that we want two conditions to be proved , we want the remainder when m is divided by ito be , in another words i divides m and we also want the remainder when n is divided by i to be ,so i should divide both m and n and if so we add i to the list of common factors . and having done soonce again we are doing it in ascending order , so the common factors are being added as we goalong the larger ones come later . so , we finally want the last element which in python is given as theminus th element of the list cf . so having done this , maybe we can simplify things further . do weneed a list of common factors at all ? remember that we only need the largest common factor . weobserved that there will always be at least one common factor namely . so , the notion of the largestcommon factor will always be well defined for any pair m and n. each time we can start with andeach time we find a larger common factor we can discard the previous one , we do not need toremember all the common factors we only need the largest one . so this can be greatly simplifyingour strategy because we do not need to keep the list of every possible common factor in this list wejust need to keep the largest one that we have seen . we can use a name say mrcf for the most recentcommon factor , and keep updating this name with the value of the common factor that we saw last .so here is a python implementation of this idea where we do not have a list at all . we directly scanall the possible common factors from to the minimum of m and n. whenever we find a commonfactor we update the value of our name mrcf to be the current common factor that we have found .now remember that will always be a common factor , so initially mrcf will be assigned the value , itwill not be that we go through this repeated execution of this and never assign mrcf because thecondition is never true . since one is the common factor we will at least have mrcf equal to , but ifwe find a larger common factor the one will be replaced by the later common factor . at the end ofthis for iteration or loop what we end up with is the largest common factor that we found betweenand the minimum of m and n which is indeed the gcd of m and n. we can still do some furtheroptimizations . since , we are looking for the largest common factor , why do we start at the beginningwhich will give us the smallest common factor . so , we can start at the end of the list and workbackwards . instead of running from to the minimum of m and n we can start from the minimum ofm and n and work backwards to . again the guarantee is that the will always show up as acommon factor , so if there are no other common factors at the very end we will find as the greatestcommon factor . and in this process we do not have to ever go past any common factor that we find ,if we are working backwards from largest to smallest the very first common factor we find must be infact the gcd of m and n. how would we write this in python ? well , you can modify that for i in range ,so notice that normally this function goes from a smaller value to a bigger value , you can modify thisto go backwards instead . but instead of doing this which we will see how to do later on when weactually get into formal python , let us explore a new way of going through a list of values . we start byassigning to the index i , the value that we want to start with namely the minimum of m and n ,remember we want to start at the largest possible value for i and go backwards . so what we have is ,a new word instead of for called while , so while as the english word suggests is something thathappens while the condition is true . so , while the i that we are looking for is positive . so while i isgreater than , what do we do ? we check if i is a common factor . this is the same as before , wecheck whether i divides m and i also divides n. if we find the common factor we are done , we justreturn the value of i that we have found and we implicitly exit from this function . every time you seea return statement in a function , the function terminates and the value in the return is what thefunction gives back to us . so we start with i equal to the minimum of m and n and we check whetheri is a common factor if it is so we exit and return the value of i that we last found . and this is the onlyvalue that we need , we do not need any other common factors . so , we return the very first time wesee a common factor . on the other hand , if i is not a common factor we need to proceed by checkingthe next one which is to go backwards and this is the achieved by this update . so , remember that wesaid that we can assign values or update values using this equality operation . this equality operationis not mathematical equality as it looks , but rather it is the assignment of a value . it says , take the oldvalue of i and make it the new value . so it says , update i to i minus , take the current value of i ,subtract and replace it in i. the mathematical equality is written as double equal too this is whatwe use in our conditions . so , it is important to remember this that double equal to means equality asin the left hand side is equal to the right hand side , whereas the single equality in python and manyother programming languages means assign a value to a variable . so , this is the final optimizationthat we have of this naive algorithm which is to basically scan for common factors from thebeginning to the end . so now we are doing it from the end to the beginning and keeping only thefirst factor that we find . what we saw in this example is a new kind of loop . so , this new kind of loophas a special word while . and while is accompanied by condition , so long as the condition is true , wedo whatever is within the body of the while . now notice that python uses indentation , so thesestatements here are offset with respect to the while . this is how python knows that steps to kbelong to this while . so , these are the steps that must be repeated at the end of this thing , you comeback and you check whether the condition is still true , if it is true you do it one more time and so on .so , while is useful when we do not know in advance how many times we will repeat the steps . whenwe were scanning for the list of factors we knew that we would start with one and go up to theminimum of m and n. we could predict in advance that we would do precisely that many steps andso we could use this for loop , so for loop has a fixed number of repetitions . on the other hand , awhile loop is typically used when you do not know in advance when you are going to stop . so in thiscase we going to start with the minimum of m and n , work backwards and stop as soon as we findthe factor , but we have no idea in advance whether this will come early or will have to go all the wayback to which we know is guaranteed to be a valid factor . one of the problems that one could facewith the while is that we keep coming back and finding that the condition is true . so we neverprogressed out of the while . so , so long as the condition is true these steps will be executed and thenyou go back and do it again . if you have not changed something which makes the condition false youwill never come out . in our previous example , in order to make the condition false we need to i tobecome . so we start with the minimum of m and n. so , what we guarantee is that every time we gothrough this while and we do not finish what we wanted to do we reduce i by , and so since we startwith some fixed value and we keep reducing i by eventually we must reach . so in general whenyou use a while loop you must make sure that you are making progress towards terminating the loopotherwise you have a dangerous kind of behavior called an infinite loop where the computation justkeeps going on and on without returning a value and you have no idea whether it is just taking a verylong time to compute the answer or whether it is never going to finish . so in this lecture what wehave seen is that we can start with a very naive idea which more or less implements the function asit is defined and work our ways to dramatically simplify the algorithm . now one thing from acomputational point of view , is that though the newer versions are simpler to program and thereforeto understand , the amount of time they take is not very different . we are still basically runningthrough all values in principle from to the minimum of m and n. if we start from the beginning thenwe will run through all these values anyway because we scan all these numbers in order to find thecommon factors . in the last version where we were trying to work backwards and stop at the firstcommon factor it could still be that the two numbers have no common factor other than . so again ,we have to run all the way back from minimum of m and n back to before we find the answer .although , the programs look simpler computationally , they are all roughly the same and that theytake time proportional to the values m and n. what we will see in the next lecture is that we canactually come up with a dramatically different way to compute gcd , which will be much moreefficient . welcome to the first lecture on the course on programming data structures and algorithmin python . let 's start with the basic definition of what we mean by an algorithm and whatprogramming is . as most of you probably know , an algorithm is a description of how to systematicallyperform some task . an algorithm consists of a sequence of steps which can we think of as a recipe inorder to achieve something . so , the word recipe of course , comes from cooking where we have list ofingredients and then a sequence of steps to prepare a dish . so , in the same way an algorithm is a wayto prepare something or to achieve a given task . so , in the context of our thing , a recipe will is whatwe call a program . and we write down a program using a programming language . so , the goal ofprogramming language is to be able to describe the sequence of steps that are required and to alsodescribe how we might pursue different sequences of steps if different things happen in between .the notion of a step is something that can be performed by whatever is executing the algorithm .now a program need not be executed by a machine although that will the typical context ofcomputer programming were we expect a computer to execute our steps . a program could also beexecuted by a person . for instance , supposing the task at hand is to prepare a hall for a function . so ,this will consists of different steps such as a cleaning the room , preparing the stage , making sure thedecoration are up , arranging the chairs and so on . this will be executed by a team of people . nowdepending on the expertise and the experience of this group of people , you can describe thisalgorithm at different levels of detail . for instance , an instruction such as arrange the chair wouldmakes sense if the people involved know exactly what is expected . on the other hand , if this is a newgroup of people who have never done this before you might need to describe to step in more detail .for instance , you might want to say that arrange the chairs in the rows and put chairs in eachrow . so , the notion of a step is subjective , it depends on what we expect of the person or themachine which is executing the algorithm . and in terms of that capability , we describe the algorithmitself . our focus in this course is going to be on computer algorithms and typically , these algorithmsmanipulate information . the most basic kind of algorithm that all of us are familiar with from highschool is an algorithm that computes numerical functions . for instance , we could have an algorithmwhich takes two numbers x and y , and computes x to the power y. so , we have seen any number ofsuch functions in school . for example , to compute square root of x , so what we do in school is wehave complicated way to compute square root of x or we might have x divided by y where we do longdivision and so on . these are all algorithms , which compute values given one or more numbers theycompute the output of this function . but all of us who have used computers know that many otherthings also fall within the realm of computation . for instance , if we use a spreadsheet to arrangeinformation and then we want to sort of column . so , this involves rearranging the items in thecolumn in some order either in ascending order or descending order . so , reorganizing information isalso a computational task and we need to know how to do this algorithmically . we also seecomputation around us in the day today s life . for instance , when we go to a travel booking site andwe try to book a flight from one city to another city it will offer to arrange the flights in terms of theminimum time or the minimum cost . so , these are optimization problems . this involves alsoarranging information in a particular way and then computing some quantity that we desire . in thiscase , we want to know that a we can get from a to b , and b among all the ways we can get from a tob we want the optimum one . and of course , there are many , many more things that we see daytoday , which are executed by computer programs . we can play games . for instance , we can solvesudoku or we can play chess against a program . when we use the word processor to type adocument or even when we use our cell phones to type sms messages , the computer suggestscorrection in our spelling . we will look at some of these things in this course , but the point is to notethat a program in our context is anything that looks at information and manipulates it to a givenrequirement . so , it is not only a question of taking a number in and putting the number out . it couldinvolve rearranging things . it could involve computing more complicated things . it could involveorganizing the information in a particular ways , so these computations become more tractable andthat is what we call a data structure . so to illustrate this let us look at the function which most of ushave seen and try to understand the algorithmically . so , the property that i want to compute is thegreatest common decide divisor of two positive integers m and n. so , as we know a divisor is anumber that divides . so k is a divisor of m if i can divide m by k and get no reminder . so , the greatestcommon divisor of m and n must be something which is a common divisor . so , common means itmust divide both and it must be the largest of these . so , if the largest k such that k divides m and kalso divides m. for instance , if we look at the number and , then we can see that is the factorof , is the divisor of , is also divisor of , another divisor of is , but is not a divisor of .so , if we go through the divisors of and twelve it is easy to check that the largest number thatdivides both and is . so , gcd of and is . what about and . is by . so , it has onlyone divisor other than and , which is . and is not a divisor of , but fortunately is a divisorof . so , we can say that gcd of and is there is no number bigger than that divides bothand . since divides every number , as we saw in the case of and , there will always be atleast one common divisor among the two numbers . the gcd will always be well defined it will neverbe that we can not find the common divisor and because all the common divisors will be numbers ,we can arrange them from smallest to largest and pick the largest one as the greatest commondivisor . so , given any pair of positive number m and n , we can definitely compute the gcd of thesetwo numbers . so , how would one go about computing gcd of m , n ? so , this is where we come to thealgorithmic way , we want to describe the uniform way of systematically computing gcd of m n for anym or any n. so , here is a very simple procedure . it is not the most efficient we will see better once aswe go along . but if we just look at the definition of gcd it says look at all the factors of m , look at allthe factor of n and find the largest one which is the factor of both . so , the naive way to do this wouldbe first list out factors of m , then list out all the factor of second number n and then among thesetwo lists report the largest number that appears in both lists . this is almost literally the definition ofgcd . now question is does this constitute an algorithm . well , at a high level of detail if we think of listout factors as a single step , what we want from an algorithm are two things . one is that thedescription of what to do must be written down in a finite way . in the sense that i should be able towrite down the instruction regardless of the value m and n in such a way it can read it andcomprehend it once and for all . here is very clear , we have exactly three steps right . so , we havethree steps at constitute the algorithm so it certainly presented in a finite way . the otherrequirement of an algorithm is that we must get the answer after a finite number of steps . of thisfinite number of steps may be different for different values of m and n , you can imagine that if youhave a very small number for n there are not many factors they are the very large number for n youmight have many factors . so , the process of listing out the factors of m and n may take a long timehowever , we want to be guaranteed that this process will always end and then having done this wewill always able to find the largest number that appears in both lists . to argue that this process is welldefined all we need to realize is that the factors of m must be between and m. in other words , wealthough there are infinitely many different possibility as factors we do n't have to look at anynumber bigger than m , because it can not go into m evenly . so , all we need to do to compute thefactors of m is to test every number is range one to m and if it divides m without a reminder , then weadd it to list of factors . so , we start with empty list of factors and we consider it on , , , up to mand for each such number we check , whether if we divide m by this number we get a reminder ofwe get a reminder of we add it to the list . let us look at the concrete example , let us try tocompute the gcd of and . so , the first step in our algorithm says to compute the factors of .so , by our observation above the factors of must lie between one and nothing bigger thancan be a factor . so , we start a listing our all the possible factors between one and and testingthem . so , we know of course , that will always divide in this case divides , because dived byis with no remainder . now does not divide , does not divide , does not divide , does notdivide but does , because if we divide by we get a remainder of . then again does notdivide , nine does not divide and so on . and finally , we find that the only other factor left is itself .so for every number m and m will be factors and then there may be factors in between . so ,having done this we have identified that factors of and these factors are precisely the , , and. the next step in computing the gcd of and is to compute the factors of . so , in the sameway we write down the all the numbers from one to and we check which ones divide . so , againwe will find that divides , here does not divide because is not even , does divides , then wefind a bunch of numbers here , which do not divide . then we find that divides , because 's are .then again does not divides , but does . then again there are large gap of numbers , which do notdivide . and then does divide , because 's are . and then finally , we find that the last factorthat we have is . so , if we go through this systematically from one to crossing out each numberwhich is not a factor we end up with the list , , , , and . having computed the factors of thetwo numbers and the next step in our algorithm says that we must find the largest factor thatappears in both list . so , how do we do this , how do we construct a list of common factors . now thereare more clever ways to do this , but here is a very simple way . we just go through one of the lists saythe list of factors of and for each item in the list we check it is a factor of . so , we start withand we say does appear as a factor of . it does so we add to the list of common factors . then welook at then we ask does it appear it does not appear so we skip it . then we look at and look atrather and we find that does appear so we add . then finally , we look at and find that doesnot appears so we skip it . in this way we have systematically gone through , , and andconcluded that of these only and appear in both list . and now having done this we have a list ofall the common factors we computed them from smallest to biggest , because we went to the factorsof in ascending order . so , this list will also be in ascending order . so , returning the largest factorsjust returns the right most factor in this list namely . this is the output of our function . we havecomputed the factors of , computed the factors of , systematically checked for every factor of, whether it is also a factor of and computed the list of common factors here and then from thislist we have extracted the largest one and this in fact , is our gcd . this is an example of how thisalgorithm would execute . if you have to write it down in little more detail , then we could say that weneed to notice that we need to remember these lists , right , and then come back to them . so , weneed to compute the factors of keep it side we need to write it down somewhere we need tocompute the factor of write it down somewhere and then compare these two lists . so , in otherwords we need to assign some names to store these . let us call fm for factors of m and fn factors of nas the names of these lists . so , what we do is that we run through the numbers one to m. and foreach i , in this list to m we check , whether i divide m , whether m divided by i as reminder and if sowe add it to the list factors of m or fm . similarly , for each j from to n we check , whether j divides nand if so we add it to the list fn . now we have two lists fm and fn which are the factors of m andfactors of n. now we want to compute the list of common factors , which we will call cf . so , what wedo is for every f that is a factor of a first number , remember in our case was where each f so weran through , , and in our case right . so , for each f is list we add f to the list of the commonfactors if it also appears in the other list . so , in the other list if you number is , , , , and . so ,we compare f with this list and if we find it we add it to cf . and having done this now we want toreturn the largest value of the list of common factors . remember that one will always be a commonfactor . so , the list cf will not be empty . there will be at least one value , but since we add them inascending order since the list fm and fn , where constructed from to m and to n the largest valuewill also be the right most value . this gives us a slightly more detailed algorithm for gcd . it is more orless same as previous one except spells out little more details how to compute the list of factors of mand how to compute the list of factors of n and how to compute the largest of common factorbetween these two lists . so , earlier we had three abstract statements now we are expanded out into, slightly more detailed statements . this already gives us enough information to write our firstpython program . of course , we will need to learn little more , before we know how to write it , but wecan certainly figure out how to read it . so , what this python programming is doing is exactly what wedescribed informally in the previous step . the first thing in the python program is a line whichdefines the function . so , we are defining a function gcd of m comma n. so , m and n are the twoarguments which could be any number like any function . it 's like when we read f of x y inmathematics it means x and y are arbitrator values and for every x and y do something depending onthe values that we a call the function with . so , this says that this is a definition , so def for definitionof a function gcd m , n. now the first step is to compute the list of factors of m. in python we write alist using square brackets . so , list is written as x y z and so on . so , the empty list is just an openbracket and a square close bracket . so , we start off with an empty list of factors . so , this equalitymeans assign a value . so , we assign fm the list of factors of m to be the empty list . now we need totest every value in the range to n. now python has a built in function called range , but because ofwe shall see , because of peculiarity of python this returns not the range you except , but one less . so ,if i say give the numbers in the range to n plus , it gives me in the range one to m , one up to theupper limit , but not including the upper limit . so , this will say that i takes the values one two three upto m. for each of these values of i , we check whether this is true . now percentage is the remainderoperation . it checks whether remainder of m divided by i is . if the remainder of m divided by i isthen we will append i to the list fn , we will add it to the right append is the english word which justmeans add to the end of the list . so , we append i to n. so , in this step , we have computed fm . this isexactly what we wrote informally in the previous example we just said that for each i from to madd i to fm if i divides m and now we have done it in python syntax . so , we have defined an emptylist of factors and for each number in that range we have checked it is a divisor and then add it . andnow here we do the exactly the same thing for n. so , we start with the empty list of factors of n forevery j in for this range if it divides we append it . now , at this point we have two list fm and fn . now ,we want to compute the list of common factors . so , we use cf to denote the list of common factors .initially there are no common factors . now , for every factor in the first list if the factor appears in thesecond list then we append it to cf . so , the same function append is being use throughout . just take alist and add a value . which value ? we add the value that we are looking at now provided it satisfiesthe conditions . so , earlier we were adding provided the divisor was uh the remainder was , nowwe are adding it provided it appears in both list . for every f in the first list if it appears in the secondlist add it . after this we have computed fm , cf . and now we want the right most element . so , this isjust some python syntax if you see which says that instead of , if we start counting from the left thenthe number the positions in the list are number , , , , and . but python has a shortcut whichsays that you want to count from the right then we count the numbers as minus , minus and soon . so , it says return the minus 'th element of cf which in python jargon means return the rightmost element . so , this is the right most element . at this point it is enough to understand that we canactually try and decode this code this program even though we may not understand exactly why weare using colon in some places and why we are pushing something . see notice that are othersyntactic things here , so there are for example , you have these punctuation marks , which are a bitodd like these colons . then you have the fact that this line is indented with respect to this line , thisline is indented to this line . these are all features that make python programs a little easier to readand write then programs in other languages . so , we will come to these when we learn python syntaxmore formally . but at this point you should be able to convince yourself that this set of python stepsis a very faithful rendering of the informal algorithm that we wrote in the previous slide . let us notesome points that we can already deduce from this particular example . so , the first important point isthat we need a way to keep track of intermediate values . so , we have two names to begin with thenames of our arguments m and n. then we use these three names to compute this list of factors andcommon factors and we use other names like i , j and f. in order to run through these . we need i torun from to n. we need j to run from to n. of course , we could reuse i. but it is okay . we use f torun through all the factors in cf . so , these are all ways of keeping track of intermediate values . thesecond point to note is that a value can be a single item . for example , m n are numbers , similarly i , jand f at each step are numbers . so , these will be single values or they could be collections . so , thereare lists . so fm is a list , fn is a list . so , it is a single name denoting a collection of values in this case alist a sequence has a first position and next position and a last position . these are list of numbers .one can imagine the other collections and we will see them as we go along . so , collections areimportant , because it would be very difficult to write a program if we had to keep producing a namefor every factor of m separately . we need a name collectively for all the factors of m regardless ofhow big m is . these names can denote can be denote single values or collections of values . and acollection of values with the particular structure is precisely what we call data structure . so , theseare more generally called data structures . so , in this case the data structure we have is a list . whatcan we do with these names and values well one thing is we can assigned a value to a name . so , forinstance when we write fn is equal to the empty list we are explicitly setting the value of fn to be theempty list . this tells two things this says the value is empyt list , so it is also tells python the fndenotes the lists these are the two steps going on here as we see . and the other part is that whenwe write something like for each f in the list cf , which is implicitly saying that take every value in cfand assign it one by one to the values f to the name f. right though they do not have this equalitysign explicitly implicitly this is assigning the new values for f as we step the list cf right . so , the mainthing that we do in a python program is to assign values to names . and having assigned a value wecan then modify the value . for instance every time we find a new factor of n we do not want tothrough any old factor we want to take the existing list fm and we want to add it . so , this functionappend for instance modifies the value of the name fn to a new name which takes the old name andsticks an i at the end of it . more generally you could have a number and we could want a replaces bytwo times a number . so , we might have something like i is equal to two times i. so , star stands formultiplication this does not mean that i is equals to two times i arithmetically because obviously ,unless i is i can not be equal to two times itself . what is means is that take the current value of i ,multiply it by two and assign it to i. so , we will see this as we go along , but assignment can eitherassign a completely new value or you could update the value using the old value . so , here we takingthe old value of the function of the list fn and we are appending a value it would getting a new valueof fn . the other part that we are need to note is how we execute steps . so , we said at the beginningof today 's lecture a program is a sequence of steps . but we do not just execute the sequence of stepsfrom beginning to end blindly . sometimes we have to do the same thing again and again . forinstance we have to check for every possible factor from to m if it divides m and then put it in thelist . so , some steps are repeated we do something , for examples here for each item in a list . andsome steps are executed only if the value that we are looking at meets particular conditions . whenwe say something like if m percent i is , if the remainder of m divided by a is then append . so , thestep append i to fm the factors of m this happens only if i matches the condition that it is a factor ofm. so , we have repeated steps where same thing done again and again . and they have conditionalssteps something which is done only if a particular condition holds . so , we will stop here . theseexamples should show you that programs are not very different from what we know intuitively , it isonly a question of writing them down correctly , and making sure that we keep track of all theintermediate values and steps that we need as we long , so that we do not lose things . we will look atthis example in more detail as we go long , and try to find other ways of writing it , and examine otherfeatures , but essentially this is a good way of illustrating programming .